Heterocosmica
Fiction and Possible Worlds

Lubomir Dolezel



Every well-invented poem is to be seen as a history from another
possible world.
-J. J. Breitinger, 1740

It is rare for the imagination of artists to be linked directly to their situation.
... The artist needs precisely to leave, by some invention or other, the
world of experience that worries, oppresses, bores or upsets him.
-George Sand, 1854

The nature of a work of art is to be not a part, nor yet a copy of the real
world (as we commonly understand that phrase), but a world by itself,
independent, complete, autonomous; and to possess it fully you must
enter that world, conform to its laws, and ignore for the time the beliefs,
aims, and particular conditions which belong to you in the other worlds
of reality.
-A. C. Bradley, 1901

A novel examines not reality, but existence. And existence is not what has
occurred, existence is the realm of human possibilities, everything that
man can become, everything he's capable 0£ Novelists draw up the map of
existence by discovering this or that human possibility.
-Milan Kundera, 1988

ONE

Contents

Preface

ix

Prologue T: From Nonexistent Entities
to Fictional Worlds

I

Narrative Worlds
Starter Terms I

I (A)

One-Person Worlds

II (T)

Action and Motivation

III (A)

Multiperson Worlds

IV (T)

Interaction and Power

V (TE)

Narrative Modalities

TWO

Intensional Functions
Starter Terms II

VI (TE)

Authentication

VII (TE)

Saturation

VIII (A)

Modern Myth

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in
Transduction: Postmodernist Rewrites

Notes
Glossary
References
Subject Index
Author Index


Preface

The art of the folk storyteller or popular crimefiction writer produces variations on stock tales and characters and
can thus be described by a "narrative grammar." But the creative energy of literature is beyond the grasp of such a restrictive model. Literary narratology needs a theory of poiesis, of the invention of new
stories in and through new texts. Such a theory emerges, unexpectedly, when we refocus our attention from narrative as story to narrative as fiction. To be sure, the domain of fiction is broader than that
of the story. Yet in this wider perspective a new vista on narrative
opens: we come to understand the conditions and principles of story
inventing as a special case offiction making.
There are many approaches to fictionality in contemporary philosophy, aesthetics, literary theory, and so on. This book treats fiction
within the paradigm of possible worlds. A concept with a venerable
philosophical tradition, "possible worlds" was resurrected by contemporary logic and analytic philosophy and penetrated into the theoretical discourse of natural, social, and human sciences. Treating fictional narratives as possible worlds links literary theory to a dynamic
interdisciplinary network and provides it with the model ofpoiesis we
could not find in "classical" narratology. The universe of possible
worlds is constantly expanding and diversifying thanks to the incessant world-constructing activity of human minds and hands. Literary
fiction is probably the most active experimental laboratory of the
world-constructing enterprise.

We live in the era of poststructuralism, but this stage of intellectual history is more complex than some of its speakers would have us
believe. To be sure, in Anglo-Saxon poststructuralist academic criticism the French and German philosophical "imports" are much more
popular than the "native" analytic philosophy. But who suffers from
this puzzling paradox? Analytic philosophy has preserved the sober
spirit of critical thinking at a time of bloated verbosity. This spirit,
which requires controlled theory formation and testing, precise conceptual analysis, and fair assessment of the ideas of the past, has not
died but has carried us into the computer age.
We grasp fiction in opposition to reality (actuality). If reality is
called fiction, a new word for fiction has to be invented. If we accept
the assumptions of the realist ontology, we need not get bogged
down in exasperating metaphysical issues but can devote our intellectual energy to tackling problems that lie within our expertise: How
do fictional worlds come into existence? What are their structures
and types? How do they depend on the literary text? How are they reconstructed in reading? How do they move through literary history?
A realist ontology does not commit us to the postulates ofliternry
realism. In fact, this book reserves its strongest criticism for the ancient but persistent doctrine of mimesis, a theory of fictionality that
claims that fictions are imitations or representations of the actual
world, of real life. Mimetic doctrine is behind a very popular mode
. of reading that converts fictional persons into live people, imaginary
settings into actual places, invented stories into real-life happenings.
Mimetic reading, practiced by naive readers and reinforced by journalistic critics, is one of the most reductive operations of which the
human mind is capable: the vast, open, and inviting fictional universe is shrunk to the model of one single world, actual human experience. Even if its sole merit were to offer an alternative to the doc~
trine of mimesis, possible-worlds semantics of fictionality deserves a
hearing.
Denial of the mimetic character of fiction making does not mean
severing the strong links between fiction and actuality. The semantics
of this book sees a bidirectional exchange: in one direction,.in constructing fictional worlds, the poetic imagination works with "material" drawn from actuality; in the opposite direction, fictional constructs deeply influence our imaging and understanding of reality.

However, the exchange can be properly observed and described only
if we insist on a distinction between the actual and the fictional. By
setting firm boundaries, we avoid confusion whenever our aesthetic
desire or cognitive project invite us to transworld travel.
At least since Romanticism, the study ofliterature has faced a fundamental challenge: how to fuse "nomothetic" and "ideographic" research, how to pursue concurrently abstract theory and concrete text
analysis. The zigzag method, pioneered by Wilhelm von Humboldt
in his monograph on Goethe's Hermann und Dorothea (1799) and
popularized by Roland Barthes in his study of Balzac's "Sarrasine"
(1970), responds to the challenge: concepts of a theory are tested in
text analysis, and, in turn, the analysis inspires new developments on
the theoretical level. In the composition of the present book I advance the zigzag method by differentiating three kinds of chapters:
theoretical (T), theoretical with examples (TE), and analytical (A),
corresponding to the three epistemological modes of poetics-theoretical, analytical, and exemplificatory. We observe literary phenomena in a dual perspective: as particulars of a literary work and as universals of a systematic theory. Moreover, each of the two parts of the
book starts with a special section defining the basic theoretical vocabulary. In order to substitute for the lack of examples in the purely
theoretical chapters (II and IV), cross-referencing to literary works
analyzed in chapters I and III is provided. The number of the works
analyzed is necessarily limited. The purpose of the theoretical chapters is to provide the reader with a systematic account of the basic
concepts of fictional semantics and invite him or her not only to expand and refine the theory but also to undertake further analytical
ventures.
All quotations from non-English primary and secondary sources
are translated; only when it is indispensable for precise understanding is the original wording quoted after the translation. The list of
primary sources contains only the literary works that are treated at
some length and particularly those for which page references are
given. After a quotation from a translated literary text, two page
numbers appear; the first refers to an edition in the original language,

the second to an English translation; both are included in the list of
primary sources. Since all translations are my responsibility, references to the extant English translations are provided only for the
reader's convenience. I trust that the book's composition and style
will greatly facilitate its reading. The reader need not follow the order
of the exposition but is invited to browse.
I have worked on this book for a long time, but I believe that even in
this time of microwave cooking and fast-food take-outs, patience,
meticulousness, and a flair for seasoning are still necessary for preparing a fine meal. I have been publishing papers on fictional semantics
for more than twenty years. But all material taken from my previous
writings has been substantially reworked, so that this book is a new
text both in overall design and in particular formulations.
It is impossible to list all the friends and colleagues who stimulated
my thinking about literary fiction by their encouragement, comments, and criticism. Yet the names of four friends and comradesin-arms have to be spelled out: Benjamin Harshaw (Hrushovski),
Thomas G. Pavel, Gerald Prince, and Marie-Laure Ryan. I owe special gratitude to Nancy H. Traill for her invaluable assistance in my
struggle to reconcile conceptual precision and readability.

Prologue T
From Nonexistent Entities to
Fictional Worlds

Fictionality is a popular topic in modern logic and philosophy, where
it is closely linked to the venerable issue of nonexistent entities. Two
questions have dominated the debate: (1) what is the ontological
character of nonexistent or fictional particulars (golden mountain,
Odysseus, the present king of France); and (2) what is the logical status of fictional representations, especially the reference of fictional
terms and the truth-conditions of fictional sentences. The inconclusiveness of the philosophical debate is only partly due to the complexity of these questions. The main culprit is the atomistic approach, which has burdened analytic philosophy. Opposed to
"system-building" (Lindenfeld 1980, 198), analytic philosophers have
practiced a dated, prestructural (presystemic) methodology. The second culprit is the parochialism of much contemporary philosophizing. If, as P. F. Strawson posits, "one of the principal philosophical
drives is ... to relate and connect our various intellectual and human
concerns in some intelligible way'' (1992, 12), then contemporary philosophy, in contrast to classical philosophy, fails in this "drive." The
human and social sciences have developed sophisticated methods of
investigation and formulated theories of high standard; it is no longer
possible to pursue a philosophy of language, literature, mental phelnomena, or human society and completely ignore linguistics, literary
study, psychology, and sociology. When treating the problem of fictionality philosophers cannot continue ignoring the theoretical developments in literary studies, semiotics, art history, anthropology,
and so forth. 1 In their turn, students ofliterature and the arts, giving
in to relaxed theoretical and conceptual standards in their disciplines,
have only rarely been influenced by the spirit of critical thinking and'
conceptual rigor emanating from analytic philosophy. Yet today, in
our interdisciplinary age, we cannot feel comfortable in "splendid isolation"; we are able-indeed, obliged-to proceed toward a unified
theory of fictionality.
The ground for the unified theory has to be prepared by bringing
together in comparison and confrontation the various conceptions of
fictionality, which have been formulated in isolation. I believe that
fictionality is primarily a semantic phenomenon located on the axis
"representation (sign)-world"; its formal and pragmatic aspects are
not denied but have an auxiliary theoretical role. Consequently, the
focus of this prologue is on extant semantics of fictionality, while formal and pragmatic theories are only touched upon (Pr.1.5).

r .. One-World Frame
The best-known theories of fictionality are based on the assumption that there is only one legitimate universe of discourse (domain
of reference), the actual world. My presentation of these semantics
follows not a chronological but a logical order, a succession that corresponds to the degree to which they accept the legitimacy of fictional representations.
1.1. Bertrand Russell: empty terms. Russell's view is at the extremity of the one-world semantics of fictionality because he was absolutely consistent in his "robust" realism: "There is only one world,
the 'real' world .... It is the very essence of fiction that only the
thoughts, feelings, etc., in Shakespeare and his readers are real, and
that there is not, additional to them, an objective Hamlet" (1919,
169). 2 Russell is consistent in accepting the necessary consequences of
the one-world model: fictional entities do not exist, fictional terms
lack reference (are "empty"), and fictional sentences are false. Fictional entities are lumped together with other nonexistent entitiesimpossible objects (square circle), empty mathematical terms (the
even prime other than 2), erroneous designations (the present king of
France), discarded scientific concepts (phlogiston), and so on-and
share their ontological and logical fate.3
The core of Russell's logic of nonexistent entities is his well-known
theory of descriptions ([1905] 1974). We need not rehearse the details
of this analysis, which, Russell believed, eliminates empty terms from
logical language and rational discourse. What concerns us here are
the consequences of Russell's views for the theory of literary fiction.
Since names of fictional particulars are empty terms, both "Emma
Bovary committed suicide" and "Emma Bovary died of tuberculosis"
have one and the same truth-value-false. No decisions about individuating properties of fictional particulars can be made, no descriptions of their appearance or activity can be offered. 4 Russell tried to
bypass these implausible consequences by claiming that only concepts enter propositions and, on this level, we can make a distinction
between unicorn and sea-serpent: 'I met a unicorn' or 'I met a sea-serpent' is a perfectly significant assertion, if we know what it would be
to be a unicorn or a sea-serpent, i.e., what is the definition of these
fabulous monsters .... Since it is significant (though false) to say 'I
met a unicorn,' it is clear that this proposition, rightly analyzed, does
not contain a constituent 'a unicorn,' though it does contain the concept 'unicorn'" (1919, 168). Russell does not explain where the knowledge of fictional concepts comes from. However, by admitting that
fictional terms, despite their lack of reference, do not lack signification, he in fact abandoned his extreme position and unwittingly
switched to a softer version of one-world semantics of fictionality, the
Fregean doctrine.

1.2. Gottlob Frege: pure sense. Frege's semantic treatment of fiction rests on his well-known distinction between two aspects of meaning,
reference (Bedeutung) and sense (Sinn). Reference is the denotation of
an entity in the world; sense, "the mode of presentation'' of the reference ([1892] 1969, 41; 57). Frege makes no allowance for fictional reference: if Odysseus is a fictional name, then it lacks reference (47; 62).
On this question, Frege and Russell are allied. It ~annot be otherwise,
since both of them deny fictional entities domicile: there are no
worlds behind fictional words. But since Frege's semantics is two-dimensional, it can stipulate that fictional terms (representations),
while without reference, are meaningful, their meaning constituted
and exhausted by sense. Softer truth-conditions for fictional sentences can be posited: lacking reference, they lack truth-value, that is,
are neither true nor false. 5 Fiction is part and parcel of poetry (Dichtung), a pure-sense language liberated from reference and truth-valuation. Poetic language has to be so exempt in order to serve its proper
aim-providing "aesthetic delight." In contrast, the language of science can fulfill its aim-the pursuit of knowledge-only if it is a referential language subject to truth-valuation (48-63). The differentiation of cognitive (referential) and poetic (pure-sense) language leads
us to designate Frege's doctrine as a semantics of one world with two
languages.
After a long delay, the significance of Frege's ideas was recognized
in logical semantics (see, e.g., Dummett 1973; Sluga 1980; Carl 1994;
Schirn 1976; Sluga 1993, esp. vol. 4) and, to a certain degree, in literary theory (Gabriel 1975; Levin 1978; Dolezel 1982). The Fregean conception is implicitly present whenever a functional and semantic
(truth-conditional) opposition between the language of cognition
and the language of fiction is postulated. 6 Despite the epistemological significance of this postulate (Pr.3; VI.I), we should not hide a major difficulty in Frege's conception of pure-sense language: if sense is
defined on the basis of reference, that is, as the referent's "mode of
presentation," then it seems impossible to speak about the sense of
terms that lack reference. The difficulty has been spelled out by
Evans: "It is really not clear how there can be a mode of presentation
associated with some term when there is no object to be presented"
(1982, 22). Obviously, if the idea of pure-sense language is to become
logically sound, sense has to be defined independently of reference.
Such a recasting of sense is achieved in Saussure's theory of meaning.

1.3. Ferdinand de Saussure: self-reference. Saussure was convinced that the notion of reference is tied to an obsolete, primitive
view oflanguage as a transparent medium, as nomenclature, "a list of
terms each corresponding to a thing" ([1916] 1972, 97; 65). In contrast
to "passive" referring, Saussure assigns to language an active semiotic
role. The meaning of the linguistic sign is not defined on the external
axis "language-world" but on the internal nexus "signifier (signifiant)l signified (signifie)." The form of the linguistic expression, the
signifier, is assigned a sense, a signified, by convention. The semantic
structure oflanguage was thus made independent of the structures of
the world. A concept of sense independent of reference is now available: sense is determined by the formal structure of the signifier,?
Saussure's views have had a strong impact on twentieth-century
linguistic and literary semantics. They also inspired an influential
theory of poetic language: liberated from extralingual reference, poetic language is "self-referential." 8 It is an active source of new meaning produced in unconventional manipulations of the signifiant I signifie nexus. There is no denying the importance of the Saussurean
shift for the understanding of poetic meaning production. But how
does the concept of fictionality fare in a semantics without reference?
Searching for a theory of fictionality in a semantics without reference
brings disappointment. Saussure himself did not ponder the issue,
and the Saussureans have either evaded it or dissolved it in the concept of poetic language. Having put a "moratorium on referential issues" (Pavel 1986, IO), literary semantics inspired by Saussure have
been theories of poeticity, not of fictionality. 9
At this point, we are beginning to suspect that the one-world
frame is not a propitious ground for fictional s~mantics. Russell's
faceless fictional nonentities are theoretically explained by being eliminated. In Frege's and Saussure's semantics, "fictionality'' is absorbed
into broader categories-poetry (Frege) and language (Saussure)characterized by lack of reference. Before we lose faith in the oneworld model frame, however, we have to inspect the most ancient
and authoritative version of fictional semantics, the <loctrine of
mimesis. Despite its philosophical origins, mimetic semantics has

been cultivated primarily in aesthetics and literary criticism; unlike
the philosophical and linguistic semantics dealt w~th so far, mimesis
was expressly designed as a theory of fictional representations.
1.4. Mimesis: actual protorypes. From its very beginning,
namely, since the statements of Socrates (reported by Xenophon) and
the writings of Plato and Aristotle, the mimetic doctrine has dominated occidental aesthetic thinking (see Dolezel 1990, 33-37). Its chief
idea seems to be clear: fictional entities are derived from reality, they
are imitations or representations of actually existing entities. But during its long reign the doctrine has been interpreted in many different
ways and thus has become a theoretical muddle. If we want to discover what contemporary mimetic semantics states about fiction, we
have to recover its theoretical principles from interpretive praxis of
mimetic critics.
The basic move of mimetic interpretation is to assign to a fictional
entity an actual prototype. Hundreds of plausible and implausible
suggestions can easily be found in scholarly and popularizing literature, so that two recent examples suffice for our purpose: a fifth-century High King of the Britons (Riothamus) is claimed to be the historical prototype of the legendary King Arthur (Ashe 1985); a valet to
Edward II by the name of Robert Hade, the prototype of Robin Hood
(Bellamy 1985). The guiding principle of these interpretations can be
expressed in the form of a function that I call mimetic function:

fictional particular P(f) represents actual particular P(a).
Obviously, the mimetic function provides a referential semantics of
fictionality. By matching a fictional particular with an actual counterpart-a legendary character with a historical person, a portrait
with a real man, a fictional story with an actual event, a fictional setting with an actual place-it assigns referents to fictional terms. 10
The "universe of discourse" of fictional texts proves to be the actual
world.
Mimetic semantics seems to work almost automatically for fictional entities designated by the same names as actual particulars:
Tolstoy's Napoleon-the historical Napoleon; Dickens' London6

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
the geographical London. If there exist (or existed) in the actual
world several candidates for the prototype of a fictional entity, the
matching can be achieved by a reasonably justified selection. However, the real test of mimetic semantics comes when we do not know
where to look for the prototype. Where are the actual individuals represented by Hamlet, Julien Sorel, Raskolnikov? It would obviously be
absurd to claim that the fictional Raskolnikov is a representation of
an actual young man who lived in St. Petersburg around the middle
of the nineteenth century. No historical search, however meticulous,
would bring to light documents about the existence of such an individual. Since no actual particulars can be discovered behind most fictional entities, mimetic criticism is forced into an interpretive detour:
fictional particulars are taken as representations of actual universalspsychological types, social groups, existential or historical conditions.
The mimetic function is radically altered, acquiring the form:

fictional particular P(f) represents actual universalU(a).
This function underlies the mainstream of mimetic interpretive practice since Aristotle. Erich Auerbach's work (1957), which reinstated
the authority of mimesis after the modernist attack, follows this strategy. Refusing any theorizing as too burdensome for his readers, Auerbach practices universalist mimetic interpretation spontaneously and
on a large scale: "Not only Sancho by also Don Quijote appear as persons representative of contemporary Spanish life .... Sancho is a peasant from La Mancha, and Don Quijote ... a little country squire who
has lost his mind" (342-43). "We are confronted in their boredom [the
boredom of de la Mole's guests in Stendahl's Le Rouge et le Noir] by a
political and ideological phenomenon of the Restoration period"
(456). "The novel [Madame Bovary] is the representation of an entire
human existence which has no issue" (488). "There are passages in it
[Zola's Germinal] which ... depict with exemplary clarity and simplicity, the situation and awakening of the fourth estate" (512).
Auerbach's universals are an eclectic set: fictional entities are matched
with historical, psychological, sociological, political, cultural, and other
categories. But whatever the interpretant, mimetic semantics in this
version becomes "a language without pai;ticulars" (Strawson 1959,
214-25). Literature, like the other arts, is a force of individuation,
countering the universalizing pressures of language, customs, social
representations. Depriving fictional particulars of their individuality,
universalist mimetic interpretation files them under one of its a priori categories. What fictional literature achieves, mimetic criticism
undoes.
The practice of universalist mimesis appears especially dubious if
we realize that the interpreter performs a dual operation. First, he
uses a selected interpretive system (ideological, psychological, sociological, etc.) to transcribe actuality into abstract categories; second,
he matches the fictional particulars to be interpreted with these categories. Since one and the same person performs both the categorization of reality and the matching of fictional particulars, we should
not be surprised by the fact that universalist interpretations are always
successful.
Is there a way for mimetic interpretation to avoid translating fictional particulars into actual universals? The answer is provided, in a
strange twist, by another best-seller of mimetic criticism, Ian Watt's
Rise of the Novel (1957). To be sure, Watt (who explicitly acknowledges his indebtedness to Auerbach) practices the universalist
mimetic interpretation; look, for instance, at his presentation of
Robinson Crusoe as a cross between homo economicus and a Puritan.11 But the main principle of Watt's interpretive praxis is revealed
in passages of the following kind: "Defoe ... portrays the personal
relationships of Moll Flanders" (rn); "We are given [by Richardson]
a highly detailed description of Grandison Hall" (26); "Fielding lets
us into Blifil's mind" (263); "We have not been taken [by Fielding]
close enough to Tom's mind" (274). Obviously, these interpretations
preserve fictional particulars (Moll Flanders' personal relationships,
Grandison Hall, Blifil's and Tom's minds) but do not match them
with actual entities (particular or universal). Rather, they presuppose
that fictional particulars somehow preexist the act of representation.
There are (somewhere) Moll's personal _relationships, Grandison
Hall, Blifil's and Tom's minds. Defoe, Richardson, and Fielding, hav8

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds

ing privileged access to them, report them, describe them, withhold
information about them, or share their knowledge with the readers.
A new interpretive function obtains:
actual source S(a) represents ("provides the representation of")
fictional particular P(f).

I call this interpretation pseudomimetic, because the statements of
a Wattian critic seem to express the mimetic function while, in fact,
they do not. Owing to an insidious shift in the meaning of the predicate, they identify the source of the fictional entity rather than its actual prototype. A fiction writer is a chronicler of fictional realms. The
existence of these realms is assumed without being explained. As a
theory of fictionality, pseudomimesis is vacuous. 12
Our analysis of contemporary mimetic criticism leads to the conclusion that the fictional semantics underlying its interpretive practice has a restricted scope: it accounts only for those fictional entities
that can be matched with actual prototypes. If mimetic criticism attempts to move beyond this domain, it finds itself in a double bind.
If it insists on interpreting all fictional entities as representations of actual ones, it is forced into a universalist interpretation, which deletes
fictional particulars. If fictional particulars are preserved, they are not
explained as representations of actual entities but taken as pre-existent; a source of representation is assumed to have recovered them.
These moves either substantially alter (in the case of the universalist
function) or make vacuous (in the case of the pseudomimetic function) the doctrine of mimesis.
The theoretical failure of mimetic semantics is not fortuitous; it is
a necessary consequence of its adherence to the one-world model
frame. There is no escape from what we might call the Leibniz-Russell law: the actual world cannot be the domicile of fictional particulars.13 Mimetic semantics has been perennially attractive because it
seems to offer a procedure for bypassing this law: as universal representations, fictional entities are accommodated in the actual world.
But now we can see that the mimetic and the Russellian semantics of
fictionality are not only compatible but also complementary: Russell
provided a logical procedure (theory of descriptions), mimetic semantics a hermeneutic procedure (universalist interpretation), for
dealing with fictional entities in the one-world model. In both cases,
fictional particulars are sacrificed so that the actual world may preserve its ontological purity. The fatal defect of all one-world semantics of fictionality is this: they cannot account for fictional particulars.
If we believe that works of fiction are essentially about concrete fictional persons with individuating properties in definite spatiotemporal locations, linked by peculiar relationships and engaged in unique
struggles, quests, frustrations, and victories, 14 then we have to explore
alternative theoretical approaches to fictionality.
1.5. Formal and pragmatic theories. One way out of the impasse
of the one-world model frame is to give up semantics altogether and
account for fiction by formal or pragmatic theories. The formal theories pursued by some logicians bypass the issue of fictional reference
by introducing a fiction operator, which triggers the construction of
an intentional logic for fictional sentences (Woods 1974; for a survey,
see Jacquenod 1988, 121-25). The operator is a necessary means for integrating fictional sentences into standard logical formalisms. But as
theories of fictionality the formal logics of fictional sentences are seriously defective; they leave off where such a theory should beginat the semantic interpretation of the fictionality operator. 15
Pragmatic theories-much cultivated at present because of the
general popularity of pragmatics-seemingly avoid the pitfalls of
one-world semantics by relocating the concept of fictionality from
the "sign-world" to the "sign-user" axis. Fictionality is explained as
speech-act convention: "The essence of fiction is to be located in the
nature of the speech acts performed when telling or writing a narration'' (Woltersdorff 1989, 248; see also Adams 1985; McCormick 1988,
38-77). The paradigm version of fictional pragmatics, one that treats
fictional speech acts as pretended assertions, emerged spontaneously
within both the Fregean and Russellian tradition. Frege himself gave
the impetus for its development in his later writings, especially in his
often-quoted simile: "As stage thunder is only apparent thunder and
a stage fight only an apparent fight, so stage assertion is only apparent assertion. 

It is only play, only poetry'' ([1918h9] 1966, 36; see also
Pollard 1973, 58-59; Gabriel 1975). Within the Russellian tradition,
recourse to the pragmatics of pretense was suggested by Russell
([1940] 1970, 277; 1959, 153-54) and elaborated on by John Searle:
"The author of a work of fiction pretends to perform a series of illocutionary acts, normally of the assertive type," "without any intent to
deceive." One of the basic speech acts of the fictionalist is pretended
reference, "which creates the fictional character" (1979, 65, 71; for minor modifications of this view, see Beardsley 1981 and Currie
1984/85). Evans expanded the scope of pretense by suggesting that all
participants in fictional communication, the storyteller, the audience,
the critics, play the game: "People are engaged in . . . serious exploitation of pretence ... by knowingly using empty singular terms."
An especially enthusiastic player might get so caught up in the linguistic game that it turns into an ontological one: he or she "pretends
there are such-and-such people and within the scope of the pretence
he admires or loathes them'' (1982, 364-66).1 6
From the viewpoint of literary theory, the fictional pragmatics of
pretense does not deserve more than what Dorrit Cohn has accorded
it in reference to Tolstoy's "The Death oflvan Ilyitch'': "Clearly the
last thing Tolstoy is doing here is 'pretending to be writing a biography.' I would even maintain that he is not 'pretending' to be doing
anything; he is actually doing something, namely communicating to
his reader a fictional narrative ... about the death of an imaginary
person'' (1989, 5-6; see also Cohn 1990, 784-85, 795).17
Walton developed a more sophisticated pragmatics of pretense by
blending it with ludic aesthetics. He sees fictional representations as
"continuous with children's games of make-believe." "Representational works function as props in such games, as dolls and teddy
bears serve as props in children's games" (1990, n). The crucial concept here is "props," objects that "prescribe imaginings, generate fictional truths" (51). Being "caught up in a story" means "to participate
psychologically in a game in which the story (or play or painting) is a
prop" (1984, 181-82).
Walton's pragmatics of make-believe is naive as aesthetic theory,
II

HETEROCOSMlCA

but it gives us a clue to the basic purpose of pragmatic theories of fictionality: to resolve the "conflicting intuitions" about the ontological
status of fictional entities within the one-world model frame. "In one
breath we endorse the truism that there are no dragons, unicorns,
and fairies and never have been any. In the next we find ourselves allowing that ofcourse there are, in fiction, dragons, unicorns, fairies,
and all the rest" (Walton 1990, 385; see also Nolt 1986, 442). The best
that pragmatics can offer to explain the obsessive preoccupation of all
cultures and all ages with dragons and "all the rest" is that it cannot
be serious activity, it must be the persistence of childhood games into
adulthood.
This criticism of pragmatic theories should not be read as a rejection of pragmatic aspects of fictionality. I agree fully with Pavel when
he states: "Fiction is both a pragmatic and a semantic notion, since
the organization of cosmological space obeys pragmatic reasons while
the structure itself is dearly semantic (1986, 143). Jacquenod (1988)
follows the same path and combines a pragmatics of fictionalized
communicative situations with a semantics of fictional worlds. 18 This
book does not ignore the pragmatic aspects of fiction making (chaps.
VI and VII) but integrates them into a unified theory of fictionality
whose core is fictional semantics.
2. Possible-Worlds Frame

The relegation of formal and pragmatic approaches to an auxiliary
status in a unified theory of fictionality means that we have to return
to semantics but put it on a radically different footing, replacing the
one-world with a multiple-world frame. This shift is inspired by a dynamic trend in contemporary logic and philosophy, possible-worlds
semantics. It emerged in the 1960s, especially in the classical paper of
Saul A. Kripke (1963); he proposed a "model structure" for modal
logic and interpreted it in terms of possible worlds. Without referring
to Leibniz, Kripke called upon the well-known but rarely invoked
concept of the classical German philosopher. His ignoring of Leibniz
was partly justified: he was formulating not a grand argument for
12

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
"theodicy" but an axiomatic foundation for modal logic. The Leibnizian roots of possible-worlds semantics have subsequently been revealed (see Mates 1968, 1986; Kalinowski 1985, 231-43), and through
the labors of a host oflogicians (Jaakko Hintikka, Dana Scott, Georg
H. von Wright, David Lewis, David Kaplan, Robert Stalnaker, M. J.
Cresswell, and others) not only modal logic but the whole system of
logic has been reformulated on the assumption that "our actual world
is surrounded by an infinity of other possible worlds" (Bradley and
Swartz 1979, 2). The universe of discourse is not restricted to the actual world but spreads over uncountable possible, nonactualized
worlds. 19 So it is logically and philosophically legitimate to speak of
possible particulars-persons, attributes, events, states of affairs, and
so on (Bradley and Swartz 1979, 7-8).
In logical semantics the possible-worlds model does not require
ontological commitment. Pointing specifically to Hintikka's and
Kripke's proposals, one Russian logician emphasized that they should
be taken "simply as mathematical models of the corresponding logical calculi, without any philosophical interpretation" (Slinin 1967,
137). Outside formal logic, however, the model cannot preserve ontological innocence. As Adams has recognized, it follows the fundamental split in ontology, becoming either actualism or possibilism. For
possibilism, the actual world "does not have a different status" within
the set of possible worlds, while for actualism the actual world is "a
standpoint outside the system of possible worlds from which judgments of actuality which are not world-relative may be made" (1979,
194, 202; see also Lycan 1979, 278-316). The actualist position is inscribed in Kripke's original model structure where set G (the actual
world) is singled out from the set of sets K (all possible worlds) (1963,
804) and is accepted by Plantinga (1974, 45-51; 1979, 257-72),
Rescher (1975, 90-92), Stalnaker (1984), Nolt (1986), and Cresswell
(1988, 1); even David Lewis's (1983; 1986) "indexical" theory, which
relativizes the concept of actual worlds, is inscribed within the ontology of"modal realism'' (see Miller 1990). 20
During the 1970s, the possible-worlds model expanded far beyond
modal logic to recast many traditional problems of philosophy (see
13

HETEROCOSMICA

Loux 1979b). Later on, it became an interdisciplinary paradigm that
provides new insights into theoretical issues of natural, social, and
human sciences (see Allen 1989). This expansion was facilitated by
two modifications of the original concept.
The first adjustment concerns the origin of possible worlds. Leibniz's was a metaphysical conception: possible worlds have transcendental existence, they reside in the omniscient divine mind (Stalnaker
1976, 65). They are discovered by an exceptional intellect or imagination. Contemporary thinking about possible worlds is not metaphysical. Possible worlds do not await discovery in some remote or transcendent depository, they are constructed by the creative activities of
human minds and hands. This origin of possible worlds has been
tersely stated by Kripke-"Possible worlds are stipulated, not discovered by powerful telescopes" (1980, 44)-and by M. J. Cresswell"Possible worlds are things we can talk about or imagine, suppose,
believe in or wish for" (1988, 4; see also Hintikka 1975, 28; Rescher
1975, 2-3; Lloyd 1978; Adams 1979, 203-5; Bradley and Swartz 1979,
63-64; Stalnaker 1984, 50-51).
Viewing possible worlds as human constructs brings the concept
down from the metaphysical pedestal and makes it a potential tool of
empirical theorizing. For various cognitive aims various kinds of possible worlds can be stipulated. Possible worlds oflogical semantics are
interpretive models providing the domain of reference necessary for
the semantic interpretation of counterfactual statements, modal for. mulas, intensional contexts, and so on. Possible worlds of philosophy
are coherent cosmologies derived from some axioms or presuppositions.
The scope of possible worlds of religion is equally ambitious, but
they are constructs of communal beliefs and usually given the form
of cosmological narratives. Possible worlds of natural science are alternative designs ofthe universe constructed by varying the basic physical
constants (see Rees 1989). Possible worlds of historiography are counterfactual scenarios that help us to understand actual-world history.
Similarly, possible worlds of action theory explain human acting by
envisaging different possible courses of the agent's life history (see von
Wright 1963b). 21 Possible worlds of fiction are artifacts produced by
14

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
aesthetic activities-poetry and music composition, mythology and
storytelling, painting and sculpting, theater and dance, cinema and
television, and so on. Since they are constructed by semiotic systems-language, colors, shapes, tones, acting, and so on-we are justified in calling them semiotic objects.
The second adjustment of the possible-worlds concept affects its
extent. Possible worlds of logical semantics are "total" or "maximally
comprehensive" states of affairs (Kripke 1980; 18; Woltersdorff 1980,
131), "maximal cohesive mereological sum[s] of possibilia' (Yagisawa
1988, 180). 22 The infinite size, number, and variety of possible worlds
can be handled by logical formalisms but is beyond the reach of empirical theories and research methods. Two heuristic moves have been
suggested to overcome this problem: (1) choose as your universe of
discourse a manageable subset of possible worlds, which is pertinent
to your problem (Hintikka 1975, 75; Kripke 1980, 18); and (2) design
small worlds ("miniworlds") comprising a finite number of elements
and characterized by a limited number of parameters (Hintikka,
1989, 55; Kripke 1980, 19; Cresswell 1988, 74).23 The concept of small
worlds was taken up by Umberto Eco (1989b, rn 1994, 85), who also
realized that outside logic we need "furnished" possible worlds made
up of "individuals endowed with properties" (1989a, 343; see also
Coste 1989, rr3). Following these suggestions, I treat possible worlds
of empirical disciplines, including fictional semantics, as macrostructures ("mereological sums") constituted by a finite number of possible particulars.
Literary scholars have been attracted to the possible-worlds framework ever since they discovered its potential for launching an innovative theory of fictionality (see van Dijk 1974/75; Pavel 1975/76;
Dold.el 1979; Eco 1979; Ryan 1980; Kanya 1980a, b; 1984; Maitre
1983). By refining the old idea of imaginary worlds, 24 the macrostructural concept of possible worlds inspires a theory of fictionality that
does not rest on isolated, ad hoc selected examples. Fictional entities
are treated as constituents of a higher-order, "emergent" structure, the
fictional world. It should be borne in mind, however, that a mechanical transfer of the possible-worlds idiom into literary theory would
15

HETEROCOSMICA

just add more metaphors to a metalanguage already overstocked with
these dubious terms.
Fictional worlds of literature, as already stated, are a special kind
of possible world; they are aesthetic artifacts constructed, preserved,
and circulating in the medium of fictional texts. The theses that follow show, first, in which aspects the concept of fictional world behaves as possible world (Pr.2.1-2.3). Secondly, they formulate the features that are special for the fictional worlds of literature, that is,
those features that cannot be derived from the possible-worlds model
(Pr.2.4-2.6). The theses introduce a theory of fictionalitywhich is inspired by possible-worlds semantics but which avoids the indefensible identifying of fictional worlds ofliterature with possible worlds of
logic and philosophy.25
2.1.
Fictional worlds are ensembles of nonactualized possible states
ofaffairs. Fictional worlds and their constituents, fictional particulars,

are granted a definite ontological status, the status of nonactualized
possibles. While Hamlet is not a man to be found in the actual
world,· he is an individualized possible person inhabiting an alternative world, the fictional world of Shakespeare's play. The name Hamlet is neither empty nor self-referential; it refers to an individual of a
fictional world. By positing possible worlds as the universe of fictional discourse, our semantics gives legitimacy to the concept of fictional reference.
Fictional particulars, as nonactualized possibles, are ontologically
different from actual persons, events, places. 26 We have seen that in
mimetic semantics the distinction between actual and fictional entities is blurred, particularly if they share a proper name. But it is quite
evident that fictional persons cannot meet, interact, or communicate
with real people (Walton 1978/79, 17). Possible-worlds semantics is an
explanation of this otherworldliness. It claims that Tolstoy's fictional
Napoleon or Dickens' fictional London are not identical with the historical Napoleon or the geographical London (see also Ishiguro 1981,
75). It insists that fictional individuals are not dependent for their existence and properties on actual prototypes. Still, persons with actualworld "prototypes" constitute a distinct semantic class within the set
16

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
of fictional persons (see Rescher 1975, 69; Parsons 1980, 51-52); an ineradicable relationship exists between the historical Napoleon and all
fictional Napoleons. However, this relationship extends across world
boundaries; fictional persons and their actual prototypes are linked
by transworld identity.27
The idea of transworld identity is a consequence of the contingency of worlds postulated by possible-worlds philosophy. Nixon
could have been a car salesman, Brutus might not have killed Caesar.
Despite the difference in essential characteristics, Nixon, the car
salesman, is a possible counterpart of Nixon, the thirty-seventh president of the United States; the same holds true about the Brutus who
did not kill Caesar and the historical Brutus. A formal representation
of transworld identity is Hintikka's individuation function. It "picks
out from several possible worlds a member of their domain as the
'embodiment' of that individual in this possible world or perhaps
rather as the role which that individual plays under a given course of
events" (1975, 30; see also Mondadori 1994, 284). Rescher suggests the
term versions to designate the different "descriptive guises" of "one
selfsame individual" in different possible worlds (1975, 88). Lewis,
emphasizing that "things in different worlds are never identical," links
the various incarnations of one thing in different worlds by the
"counterpart relation." It is "a relation of similarity'' and thus seems
to presuppose that the counterparts share some essential properties.
But it is also flexible enough to link the Hitler of history and a Hitler
who led "a blameless life" (1983, 27-28, 43). 28
The fiction makers practice a radically nonessentialist semantics;
they give themselves the freedom to alter even the most typical and
well-known properties and life histories of actual (historical) persons
when incorporating them in a fictional world. Verisimilitude is a requirement of a certain poetics of fiction, not a universal principle of
fiction making. It is essential to the historical Napoleon that he died
at Santa Helena. But according to a legend, quoted as a motto of
Georg Kaiser's play Napoleon in New Orleans (1937), Napoleon was
rescued from the island, taken to North America, and died in New
Orleans. 29 The nonessentialist semantics of transworld identity ap-

HETEROCOSMICA

plies not only to fictional counterparts of actual persons but equally
to the incarnations of a fictional person in different worlds. A fictional person when moved from one world to another might undergo
radical alterations (Ep.3-4).
The thread that holds together all the embodiments of an individual in all possible worlds is thin and theoretically controversial: the
proper name as rigid designator. The various incarnations of the
French emperor-historical, Tolstoy's, Stendhal's, the legend's, and
numerous other fictional incarnations, past and future-all bear the
same name. Kripke offered the following definition of this special
mode of naming: "Let's call something a rigid design,ator if in any possible world it designates the same object, a nonrigid or accidental designator if that is not the case" (Kripke 1980, 48-49). The semantic
distinctiveness of the proper name is a consequence of its peculiar
origin: it is attached to a person by an act ·of initial "baptism'' and
then is "passed from link to link'' (Kripke 1980, 139) following the
person-to use Barthes's apt formulation-like "a linguistic form of
reminiscence" (1972, 124). 30 The theory of rigid designation does not
imply that a person has to bear one proper name only. He or she can
be known under several names, aliases, nicknames, or pseudonyms.
But once the referential equivalence between the different names is
discovered ("Dr. Jekyll"= "Mr. Hyde"), the transworld link between
the counterparts is established. The person can hide behind aliases,
but this maneuver does not preclude the possibility of being identified (Ep.4). 31
As nonactualized possibles, all fictional entities are of the same ontological nature. Tolstoy's Napoleon is no less fictional than his Pierre
Bezuchov, and Dickens' London no more actual than Carroll's Wonderland. A mimetic view that presents fictional persons as a mixed
bag of "real people" and "purely fictitious characters" leads to serious
theoretical difficulties, analytical confusions, and naive critical practice. 32 The principle of ontological homogeneity is a necessary condition for the coexistence, interaction, and communication of fictional persons. It epitomizes the sovereignty of fictional worlds.

18

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
2.2 The set offictional worlds is unlimited and maximally varied.
If fiction creates possible worlds, literature is not confined to imitating the actual world. "The possible is wider than the actual" (Russell
1937, 66; see also Rescher 1975, 51; Plantinga 1977, 245). To be sure,
Leibniz imposed a restriction on possible worlds, but this restriction
is purely logical: "Possible things are those which do not imply a contradiction" ([1699] 1855, 574; Loemker 1969, 513). Worlds that include
or imply contradictions are impossible, unthinkable, "empty." Do we
have to admit this restriction into fictional semantics? I deal with the
question later (Y.2.1, VI-4-2). At the moment, let me just remark that
even if the possible-worlds model is restricted to the Leibnizian universe, it provides a much larger space for literary fiction than the oneworld frame. It does not exclude fictional worlds analogous or similar to the actual world, but it also accounts for the most fantastic
worlds, far removed from, or contradictory to, reality (see Traill 1991,
1996). Fictional worlds do not have to conform to the structures of
the actual world, just as the world of non-Euclidean geometry does
not conform to the world where Euclidean geometry is valid. There
is no justification for two semantics of fictionality, one designed for
"realistic" fiction, the other for "fantasy."3 3 Fictional worlds are not
constrained by requirements of verisimilitude, truthfulness, or plausibility; they are shaped by historically changing aesthetic factors,
such as artistic aims, typological and generic norms, period and individual styles. The history of fictional worlds of literature is the history
of an art.
While imposing a logical restriction on possible worlds, Leibniz
left wide open the variety of their designs. The laws of the actual
world are but one instance of many possible "general orders." A general order controls the entry of constituents into the world: only
those entities that comply with the general order are admitted. Thus,
a correlation is established between world "order" and compossibility
of individuals: ''As there is an infinity of possible worlds, there is also
an infinity of laws, some proper to one, others to another, and each
possible individual of a world encloses in his notion the laws of his

19

HETEROCOSMICA

world" (Leibniz [1686], 1879, 40). The set of all possibles is split into
"many different combinations of possibilities .... There are many
possible universes, each collection of compossibles making up one of
them" (Leibniz [1714] 1887, 573; Loemker 1969, 662; see Rescher
1975, 78-85; D'Agostino 1994, 246; Auletta 1994; Brown 1994,
263-65).34
Now we are able to make the concept of fictional world more definite: it is a small possible world shaped by specific global constraints
and containing a finite number of individuals who are compossible.
The global constraints imposed on the fictional world of Emma Bovary shape it as a "natural world" (as defined in V.2.1); therefore,
Emma is compossible with Rodolphe Boulanger but is not compossible with a bewitched prince. Similarly, in a historical novel like Wftr
and Peace, which respects the "order" of actual-world history,
Napoleon is compossible with Kutuzov but is not compossible with
Eisenhower. If this order is annulled, as it is in some postmodernist
novels, the most shocking congregations can assemble (Ep.4). But the
anomalies only confirm that compossibility is dependent on the
global order of the fictional world.35
2.3. Fictional worlds are accessed through semiotic channels. Actual
persons, authors and readers, can access fictional worlds but only by
crossing somehow the world boundary between the realms of the actual and the possible. Due to the different ontological status of these
realms, physical entry, direct observation, and ostension (Rescher
1975, 93) are unthinkable. Possible-worlds semantics uses the concept
of accessibility for formally representing contacts between possible
worlds.36 However, it tells us nothing about how contacts between
actual persons and fictional worlds can be established. In order to
ponder this case, we have to resort to semiotics and text theory: fictional worlds are accessed through semiotic channels and by means of
information processing. Because of the semiotic mediation, accessibility is a bidirectional, multifaceted, and historically changing commerce between the actual and the fictional.
The author. creating a literary fictional world draws on the actual
world in many ways: adopting its elements, categories, and macro20

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
structural models; borrowing "brute facts," "cultural realemes" (EvenZohar 1980; see also McHale 1987, 86), or "discursive features"
(Moser 1984); "anchoring" the fictional story to a historical event
(Wolterstorff 1980, 189); sharing "frames of reference" (Hrushovski
1984, 249); combining actual places to create a fictional location
(Coste 1989, mo); "corroborating" the thematic design (Foley 1986,
14); and so on. Literary scholars have diligently studied the input of
reality into fiction. Possible-worlds semantics makes us aware that the
material coming from the actual world has to undergo a substantial
transformation at the world boundary. Because of the ontological
sovereignty of fictional worlds, actual-world entities have to be converted into nonactual possibles, with all the ontological, logical, and
semantical consequences that this transformation entails. We have
discussed this conversion in the special case of fictional persons: actual-world (historical) individuals are able to enter a fictional world
only if they become possible counterparts, shaped in any way the fiction maker chooses (Pr.2.1).
Readers access fictional worlds in reception, by reading and processing literary texts. The text-processing activities involve many different skills and depend on many variables, such as the type of reader,
the style and purpose of his or her reading, and so on. But possibleworlds semantics insists that the world is constructed by its author
and the reader's role is to reconstruct it. The text that was composed
by the writer's labors is a set of instructions for the reader, according
to which the world reconstruction proceeds (see Iser 1978, 65). 37 Having reconstructed the fictional world as a mental image, the reader
can ponder it and make it a part of his experience, just as he experientially appropriates the actual world. The appropriation, which
ranges from enjoyment through knowledge acquisition to following
it as a script, integrates fictional worlds into the reader's reality (see
Novitz 1987, 117-42).38
The need for semiotic mediation in the readers' contacts with fictional worlds explains why fictional semantics has to resist all attempts
at "decentering," "alienating," or bypassing the literary text. A theory
of reading that denies the literary text a supraindividual semiotic con21

HETEROCOSMICA

trol destroys the only bridge between actual readers and the universe
of fiction. The reader of such a theory can do nothing but indulge in
narcissistic self-reflection and is condemned to lead the most primitive mode of existence-a life without imaginary alternatives.
When speaking about accessibility of fictional worlds, we had to
modify the logical concept and thus started to move beyond the possible-worlds frame. This model, however, continues to provide an indispensable service: in what follows we uncover the specificity of fictional worlds of literature by examining in what respects they are
unlike possible worlds of logical semantics.
2.4. Fictional worlds ofliterature are incomplete. We know that
possible worlds of logical semantics are complete or completely determinate structures. In contrast, a number of philosophers and literary theorists concur that fictional worlds are incomplete (Lewis 1978,
42-43; Heintz 1979, 90-92; Howell 1979, 134-35; Parsons 1980, 18285; Wolterstorff 1980, 131-34; Ronen 1988, 498; Margolin 1990, 847;
for a formal caveat see Mihailescu 1991). Incompleteness is established by a relatively simple test: only some conceivable statements
about fictional entities are decidable, while some are not. The question of whether Emma Bovary committed suicide or died a natural
death can be decided, but the question of whether she did or did not
have a birthmark on her left shoulder is undecidable and, in fact,
meaningless (example borrowed from Heintz 1979, 94). Alluding to
a cause celebre, Wolterstorff has succinctly justified this feature of fictional entities: "We will never know how many children had Lady
Macbeth in the worlds of Macbeth. That is not because to know this
would require knowledge beyond the capacity of human beings. It is
because there is nothing of the sort to know" (1980, 133; see also
Rescher and Brandom 1980, 5).
Crittenden's discussion of this issue is instructive in that it shows
that the opposition completeness/incompleteness reflects the contrast
actual/fictional. It also shows that Crittenden's fictional operator"in the story''-performs miracles. On the one hand, if placed under
this operator names of historical figures, such as "Gladstone," do not
refer to "the actual man'' but only to "his conceptual counterpart."
22

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
But somewhat later, under the same operator, "Holmes is a real person and so logically complete" (1991, 134, 140). It would be certainly
most profitable to know how a storyteller creates a "real person," but
Crittenden's recipe is very hard to follow: "Anyone understanding it
[the operator] realizes that the story is something real and that its content ... is a set offictional situations" (1991, 170-71, emphasis added).
Obviously, denying incompleteness to fictional entities is tantamount to treating them as real entities. 39 In chapter VII, I examine
critically this mimetic fallacy and show why and how possible-worlds
semantics respects the incompleteness of fictional worlds.
2. 5.
Fictional worlds of literature can be heterogeneous in their
macrostructure. I have claimed that the macrostructural constraints
(the "general orders") that shape a possible world ensure its semantic
homogeneity (Pr.2.2). Elementary fictional worlds correspond to this
model, but more complex worlds are composites of semantically different domains. The basic instance of semantic heterogeneity is the
dyadic world, a world split into two domains governed by contrary
global constraints (V.6.1). Composite fictional worlds are typical, indeed necessary, for narratives. Narrative fictional worlds are, as a rule,
constituted by symbiosis, hierarchies, and tensions of many domains.
They have to be semantically heterogeneous in order to provide the
stage for many and diverse acting persons, stories, and settings.
2.6. Fictional worlds ofliterature are constructs oftextual poiesis.
All possible worlds are constructs of human productive activities; fictional worlds ofliterature are products of textual poiesis. By composing a written or oral text, the author creates a fictional world that was
not available prior to this act. Textual poiesis, like all human activity,
occurs in the actual world; however, it constructs fictional realms
whose properties, structures, and modes of existence are, in principle,
independent of the properties, structures, and existential mode of actuality. Possible-worlds semantics offers a vision ofliterature as perennial creation of "fictional landscapes ... fostering the plurality of
worlds" (Pavel 1986, 136-48). Thanks to the literary text's special illocutionary force (VI.1), possibles are made fictional existents, possible
worlds become semiotic objects. It is as semiotic objects that uni23

HETEROCOSMICA

corns and fairies, Odysseus and Raskolnikov, Brobdingnag and Chevengur exist objectively and the readers can gain access to them, fear
or feel pity for them, talk and argue about them at any time. Here fictional semantics pays back some of its debt to the philosophy of possible worlds by suggesting a partial answer to the questions "what is
meant by existence in possible worlds" and "what is meant by existence ofpossible worlds" (Williams 1981, 268). 40

3. Fictional Text
The prologue has repeatedly stated that both in the wr_iter's construction and in the reader's reconstruction the fictional text is the
medium of fictional-world making. Fictional semantics would be seriously defective if it did not offer a theory of the fictional text. The
background of such a theory is the actualist version of possibleworlds semantics, which allows us to make a distinction between
world-imaging texts (I-texts) and world-constructing texts (C-texts).
The actual world exists prior to, and independently of, textual activity. Imaging texts are representations of the actual world; they provide
information about it in reports, pictures, hypotheses, and the like.
Constructing texts are prior to worlds; it is textual activity that calls
worlds into existence and determines their structures. 41
Fictional texts are a special category of C-texts, and their opposition to I-texts hinges on different truth-conditions. I-texts as representations of the actual world are subject to truth-valuation; their
statements can be judged true or false. Fictional texts are outside
truth-valuation; their sentences are neither true nor false.
Quite a few authorities on the fiction/nonfiction opposition are
close to the tenets of possible-worlds semantics. Roman lngarden
perceived that denying the opposition characterizes an ontology "according to which the real world was conceived too closely after the
fashion offictional worlds projected by works of literature; hence the
ontological character of his investigations of the literary work of art,
which lngarden hoped would reveal the untenability of any narrowing of the gap between real objects and products of consciousness"
24

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
(Smith 1979, 375 n. 3). Floyd Merrell, explaining the difference between nonexistent persons (such as the present king of France) and
fictional persons (such as Sherlock Holmes) points out that the former would become "bet-sensitive" if there was "a possible fictional
text, either past, present or future" (1983, 20-21). Paul Ricoeur defined fiction in contrast to the truth-claims of "historical narrative":
"I am reserving the term 'fiction' for those literary creations that do
not have historical narrative's ambition to constitute a true narrative"
(1985, 2:3). To support the distinction, he recalls the Aristotelian possible, the ancestor of all talk about possibilia: "The quasi-past of fiction ... becomes the detector of possibilities buried in the actual
past. What 'might have been'-the possible in Aristotle's terms-includes both the potentialities of the 'real' past and the 'unreal' possibilities of pure fiction'' (1988, p91-92).
Ann Rigney, leaning toward a pragmatic vocabulary rather than
truth-functionality, argues that "narrativity . ·.. should not be simply
treated as synonymous with 'fictionality' .... The institutional context effectively influences the extent to which many narrators are free
to invent: lawyers, historians, and economists may indulge in invention, but this is seen as incompatible with their socially defined roles,
and their chances of getting caught are relatively high since their narratives, unlike those of novelists, are subject to the challenge of alternative accounts" (1992, 280). Rigney's formulation is telling because
it shows how pragmatics avoids the real issue: the chances of lawyers,
historians, and economists "getting caught" are high not because of
social conventions but because the discourses in which they engage
are truth-functional. Cohn, facing squarely the much-misused case of
biography and autobiography, states firmly: "We cannot conceive of
any one given text as more or less fictional, more or less factual, but
that we read it in one key or the other-that fiction, in short, is not
a matter of degree, but of kind" (1989, 16).
Gerard Genette dissents. Maintaining that narratology has up to
now been concerned with "fictional recit only," 42 he proceeds to apply its (his) narrative categories to features and structures of the "factual recit." He comes to the conclusion that we must "tone down
25

HETEROCOSMICA

strongly the hypothesis about an a priori difference in the narrative
regime of fiction and nonfiction" (1991, 91). But this conclusion only
confirms that narrativity is not a criterion for the fiction/nonfiction
distinction. Genette does not mention the existence of a semantic,
truth-conditional criterion.
When it comes to truth-conditions of fictional texts, our semantics borrows from Frege the "two-language" model (Pr.1.2). But it
parts company with Frege over the issue of fictional reference: it
grants reference to the fictional text. Whereas for imaging texts the
domain of reference is given, fictional texts stipulate their referential
domain by creating a possible world. The difference in truth-conditions accounts for a major difference in the reception history of imaging and fictional texts. The pictures of the actual world provided by
I-texts are constantly challenged, modified, or canceled by validation
and refutation procedures. The fictional world cannot be altered or
canceled once its creator has fixed the constructing text.
Both literary theorists and philosophers have noticed the presence
in the fictional text of commentaries on the events, persons, and
other entities of the fictional world. Analyzing a particular case, La
Quete du Saint-Graal Tzvetan Todorov has observed that the text
proceeds along two parallel lines. Although intertwined in the textual
sequence, the two lines are distinctly different in their function: one
tells the knights' adventures, the other gives explanation of their spir~
itual significance. A special class of personages-the "wise men''-are
often the source of the commentaries (1971, 131-32). More generally,
Rescher finds it desirable "to maintain a line of separation between
the description of action and its evaluation. There are a vast host of
act-characterizing terms bearing upon the evaluative assessments of
actions: Was the act prudent or rash, considerate or thoughtless,
courteous or rude, appropriate or inappropriate, etc.?" (1966, 219).
Emanating, as a rule, from subjective sources (the narrator or fictional persons), commentaries reflect diverse points of view and
therefore can differ, even contradict each other. They participate in
the shaping of the fictional world by creating the domains of opinions, beliefs, social representations, and so on (IV.2.2). 43
26

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
Fictional commentaries deserve a more detailed investigation, especially in light of the text-based theory of commenting (see Posner
1972); but I do not intend to do more than set them apart from a different kind of commenting found in fictional texts. Boris Ejchenbaum called them "theoretical digressions" [teoreticeskije otstuplenija] (1922, 59), capturing in the term their "strangeness": they are
shifts from the constructive to an abstract mode of discourse. In contemporary narratology they are commonly known as metanarrative,
but I avoid· this term44 and call them imaging digressions (I-digressions) (under the inspiration of Ejchenbaum and in agreement with
the general term I-text). Imaging digressions are embedded in the fictional text but express opinions (beliefs) about the actual world. In
this respect, they are clearly different from fictional commentaries,
which pertain to the entities of the fictional world. A typical form of
the imaging digression is the maxim: ''.All happy families are alike but
an unhappy family is unhappy after its own fashion." But we find Idigressions of greater length, such as a refl<rction or an essay (I.1.4,
I.2.2, I.3.5). The semantics of these digressions is determined by the
fact that they claim validity in the actual world; consequently, they
are subject to the truth-conditions of the I-text. The reader or interpreter (who usually feels that these digressions express the author's
own opinions} has the right to ask whether they are true or false in
the actual world. Because they obey truth-conditions different from
the fictional text proper, I-digressions cannot be used as a source for
a semantics of fictionality.45
What started as a discussion of the universal features of the fictional text ends with a recognition of its discourse plurality (to
emerge clearly in chaps. VI and VII). Nevertheless, the basic principle of our semantics, the exemption of the fictional text from truthvaluation, is not found wanting. It was strengthened when I-digressions were separated from the fictional text proper. It receives further
support if we contrast the world-constructing text with the text about
the constructed world. Let us consider the statement, "Emma Bovary
committed suicide." This sentence is a brief paraphrase of the long
segment in Flaubert's novel where this event was constructed. (pt. 3,
27

HETEROCOSMICA

chap. 8). Flaubert is the author of the C-text; a reader, analyst, or interpreter is the author of the paraphrase. It makes no sense to ask
whether Flaubert's text is true or false, whether Flaubert was telling
the truth when he made his heroine die by poisoning herself There
was no world, no life, no death of Emma Bovary prior to Flaubert's
writing, and so there was no basis, no criterion for assigning truthvalue to his sentences. But it is appropriate, indeed necessary, to ask
whether the paraphrase is true or false. The paraphrase sentences are
true or false of Emma Bovary's fictional world; they do or do not correspond to its states of affairs. 46
The assertion that fictional texts have a special truth-conditional
status does not mean that they are less actual than imaging texts of
science, journalism, or everyday conversation. Fictional texts are
composed by actual authors (storytellers, writers) using the resources
of an actual human language and destined for actual readers. They
are called fictional on fanctional grounds, as media for making, preserving, and communicating fictional worlds. They are stores of fictionality within the world of actuality, where the products of the
writers' imagination are permanently available to receptive readers.
However distant-historically, geographically, culturally-they may
be from the world-creating act, readers have a standing invitation to
visit and use the immense library where imaginary realms are preserved.

PART ONE

Narrative Worlds

-

STARTER TERMS

I.

I

Narrative Worlds

Narrative theory has always recognized that fictional and nonfictional narratives alike are characterized by the presence of a story, a
more or less complex chain of events. Aristotle's poetics of the
tragedy-the starting point of occidental narrative theory-made action (mythos) dominant among tragedy's structural "parts" (see
Dolezel 1990, 27). Contemporary narratologists have repeatedly
stated that story is the necessary, defining constituent of narrative:
"Narrative, narrative discourse, can only be such to the extent that it
tells a story, without which it would not be narrative (like, let us say,
Spinoza's Ethics)" (Genette 1972, 74; see also Prince 1982, 1; Stein
1982; 496; Rimmon-Kenan 1983, 2-3; Bal 1985, 5). Fictional semantics
does not deny that the story is the defining feature of narrative but
moves to the foreground the macrostructural conditions of story generation: stories happen, are enacted in certain kinds of possible
worlds. The basic concept of narratology is not "story," but "narrative
world," defined within a typology of possible worlds.
31

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

1.1. Let us first introduce the world of states W(S), constituted
by static objects with stationary physical properties and fixed relations. W(S) is a closed, atemporal, Parmenidean realm of stillness and
silence, where nothing changes, nothing happens. It is the world of
eternal ideas and the universe of discourse of classical logic.
1.2. Let us net consider the world where a new entity, the Nforce or nature force (NF), appears, W(NF, S). The N-force, the effective form of the laws of nature, causes specific changes in the states
of the world, called nature events (N-events). We have now constructed a dynamic world, where changes originate in one, inanimate
source. W(NF, S) is a model of actual nature, the universe of discourse of natural science and the world of nature poetry, art, and music (such as The Seasons).
1.3. In the third stage, the world is augmented by a new category,
the person (P), and acquires the structure W(P, NF, S). The person is
an entity that possesses, in addition to physical properties, mental life
(mental states, properties, events, acts). The changes that the person
brings about are triggered by specific mental events-intentionsand are called actions. The person's productive acting enriches the
world by a new kind of object-artifacts. Acting includes semiotic
acts, particularly speech acts, in which the person uses signs to convey information.
1.4. The world W(P, NF, S) can be designed in two variants: as a
one-person world, where only one person is present, and as a multiperson world, where at least two persons exist and act. The latter
world, the most complex structure of our typology, brings forth a
new, potent source of change, interaction. A special case of interaction is communication, the exchange of information through semiotic acts. Interaction occurs between individual persons or between
groups. Groups organize into institutions to pursue intricate forms of
social acting.
World-with-person (in both of its variants) is the space of human
or humanlike existence, the universe of discourse of human and social sciences, and, most importantly for this study, the world of nar-

32

Starter Terms I
rative. Stories require the presence in the fictional world of at least
one person-agent. World-without-person can provide the initial or
the end state of some elementary stories (the genesis of the human
race or its apocalyptic extinction) but by itself is below the threshold
of narrativity. It is worlds with persons or, better, persons within
worlds that generate stories.
2. Motifs

This book is about fictional worlds-narrative macrostructuresand therefore only occasionally mentions motifs-narrative microstructures. It should be borne in mind, however, that a holistic approach does not prohibit buf, rather, requires a clear concept of parts,
elements, constituents. Definitions of the basic terms of a motif semantics are in order.
In the semantic conception, going back to Boris Tomasevskij, the
term motifdesignates the elementary unit of thematic material that
cannot be further analyzed. Tomasevskij sees a correspondence between motifs and sentences: "In principle, every sentence possesses its
moti£" He gives the following examples: "Evening came." "Raskolnikov killed the old woman." "The hero died." ''A letter was received" (1928, 136-37). In the same semantic (thematic) sense the
term motifwas used in the Prague school (Mukafovsky 1928; Vodicka
1948; for more recent developments, see Dolezel 1972; Bremond 1973,
1982; Culler 1975; Genot 1984, 314-19; Segre 1988, 88-89, 283-93).
Motif as a semantic notion is to be distinguished from its historical
counterpart, commonly encountered in folkloristic and comparative
studies. Here, it is also "the smallest element in a tale" but has the additional "power to persist in tradition" (Thompson 1951, 426; Luthi
1976, 22), where it undergoes changes, transformations, and enters
into new contexts (Putilov 1975, 144). While the conceptual difference could be bridged in theory, as Ben-Amos (1980) has attempted,
in cognitive praxis the semantic and the folkloristic investigations
have proceeded in different directions. The former concentrated on

33

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

developing more precise conceptualization and typology, the latter on
studying the transmission of motifs in the history of folklore and literature.
2.1. Motif is defined on three levels. Its logical structure is
propositional form (see Harman 1972, 25; Allwood, Andersson, and
Dahl 1977, 164-68) consisting of a predicate and one or more arguments: Pred (Argp Arg 2, ••• ). The logical structure fixes the motif's
syntax and thus distinguishes motifs from other kinds of "thematic
material." It formalizes Tomasevskij's assumption that motifs have a
structure of sentences.
2.2. Interpreting the propositional form in a standardized language of semantic representation, we obtain the motif's extensional
structure. On this level, a distinction between universal motif-types
and particular, individual motifs has to be made. The extensional
structure of motif-types is expressed in the vocabulary of the categories introduced in STl.1., which correspond roughly to terms of
the "case grammar" (proposed by Fillmore 1968 and refined by Chafe
1970, Halliday 1970, Huddleston 1970, and others; see van Dijk
1973). Objects, nature force, and persons are placed in the position of
arguments, while states, properties, relations, events, and actions appear as predicates. A typology of motifs given in table I expands and
systematizes the traditional distinction between static (descriptive)
and dynamic motifs (Tomasevskij 1928, 139). It does not aspire to
completeness, and the examples given are for pedagogical purposes
only; they are artificial to avoid confusing them with paraphrased
particular motifs (see below).
For setting up a motif typology, semantically interpreted predication is sufficient. However, in a more developed motif semantics, this
core, the "nucleus" of the extensional motif structure, will be surrounded by quantifiers, modal operators, modifiers, space and time
indexes, and so on.
In the representation of the extensional structure of particular motifs, the universal categories are instantiated. The standardized language of this representation is paraphrase (ersatz-sentences), which
we are familiar with from Pr+ The paraphrase gives us such exten34

Starter Terms I
TABLE I

Static Motifs

State (Object): The rock is heavy.
Relation (Object!> Object2): The
church is near the school.
PhysState (Person): Martin is a doctor.
Mary sits in the garden.
PhysRelation (Person!> Person2):
Stephen lives far from Theresa.
MentState (Person): Lisa is angry.
MentRelation (Person!> Person2):
Marion loves Brian.

Dynamic Motifs

N-Event (NF): The storm passed.
N-Event (NF, Object): The wind blew the
fire out.
N-Event (NF, Person): The earthquake killed
rwenty people.
PhysAct (Person): Paul ran away.
PhysAct (Person, Object): Nancy planted a tree.
Physlnteract (Person,, Person2): Caspar hit John.
MentAct (Person): Peter was thinking.
MentAct (Person, Object): Lucy calculated the
speed oflight.
SpeechAct (Person): Richard screamed in pain.
SpeechAct (Person, Object): Michelle wrote a
poem.
SpeechAct (Person!' Personi): Bob asked
Michael.

sional representations of particular motifs as "The Warsaw train was
approaching Petersburg," "Des Esseintes moved secretly from Paris to
Fontenay," "Little Dorrit married Arthur Clennam," and "Werther
believes that Lotte loves him." Paraphrase representations are the crux
of motif semantics, used in summarizing, analyzing, and interpreting
narratives. It is also safe to assume that they have a cognitive role:
motifs are probably stored in memory in paraphrase representations.
The extensional representation (both universal and particular) is
not an analysis of isolated motifs; it is assigned after a careful examination of a motif's context. This holds especially true about the crucial elementary units of narrative-event and action motifs. This
book provides such an examination by anchoring extensional motif
semantics in action theory (chaps. II and IV).
2.3. The third level ofmotif representation is texture. (The term
was used loosely by Ransom [1938]-see Righter 1963, 110-11-and
adopted as a theoretical concept by Sebeok [1974] and Stoddard
[1991].) Texture is the exact form of expression, the original wording
35

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

in which the motif appears in the literary text. The motifs paraphrased above (STI.2.2) occur in the following texture:
V konce nojabrja, v ottepel', casov v devjat' utra, pojezd Peterburgsko-Varsavskoj zeleznoj dorogi na vsech parach podchodil k
Peterburgu. (Dostoevsky, The Idiot, 5)
11 [Des Esseintes] mit les mac;:ons sur la maison qu'il avait acquise,
puis, brusquement, un jour, sans faire part a qui que ce fut de ses
projets, il se debarrassa de son ancien mobilier, congedia ses domestiques et disparut, sans laisser au concierge aucune adresse.
(Huysmans,A Rebours, 89)
And they [Amy and Arthur] were married with the sun shining on
them through the painted figure of Our Saviour on the window.
(Dickens, Little Dorrit, 894)
Nein, ich betriige mich nicht! Ich Iese in ihren schwarzen Augen
wahre Teilnahmung an mir und meinem Schicksal. Ja ich fiihle,
und daring darf ich meinem Herzen trauen, class die-o darf ich,
kann ich den Himmel in diesen Worten aussprechen?-dass sie
mich liebt! (Goethe, Die Leiden des jungen Werther, 41)
For the purposes of comparative literary study the concept of texture
has to encompass wordings rendered in a faithful translation.
By texture, the motif's intensional structure is determined. Fictional semantics is a fusion of extensional and intensional meaning.
Starter terms I (STI) continues in starter terms II (STII), and part 1
of this book links up with part 2.

I

CHAPTER I

(A)

One-Person Worlds

The one-person world is an artificial and precarious structure,. because it suffers from a severe restriction: one and only one person is
admitted into the world. But the theoretical importance of this primitive narrative world is much greater than its rarity in literary fiction
would warrant. Isolating a person from others bares the rudimentary
features of acting and mental life. The one-person world is the most
felicitous and instructive starting point for fictional semantics. 1 I begin exploring it by analyzing three rather different works of fiction:
Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe (1719), Ernest Hemingway's "Big
Two-Hearted River" (1925), and J.-K. Huysmans's A Rebours (1884).

I.

Robinson Crusoe: The Art of World Making

For the history of ideas, the one-person world of Robinson Crusoe
is a thought experiment on the popular 17th- and 18th-century topic
of the natural (primitive) state of man: What would happen to a human being left for a considerable time in complete isolation? Defoe
constructs fictionally one possible outcome of the experiment by
leaving Crusoe all alone on an island for more than twenty years.2
The one-person world has a shorter duration than Crusoe's solitude.
37

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

It is sharply demarcated by two events arranged in a chiasmic pattern:
the shipwreck on the northern shore and the discovery of a human
footprint on the southern beach. Both events radically alter the
novel's world structure. The first thrusts Crusoe involuntarily from a
multiperson into a one-person world. The second marks implicitly
the end of the one-person world: it signifies the presence of other, unseen persons.3 From that moment on, a life "in constant Snare of the
Fear ofMan" (163) begins for Crusoe. The solitary's actions are now
preventive reactions to the threat posed by a hidden enemy. Although
Crusoe remains alone for several more years, the structure of his
world and the motivation of his acting have irreversibly changed.
1.1.
Crusoe and nature. Determined to survive, Crusoe as agent
applies himself to implementing an ambitious program: transforming
nature into culture, the world-without-man into a world-for-man.
The transformation requires much hard labor, many physical actions
affecting and changing states of nature. To be sure, nature is not a
mere stage for Crusoe's performance; it is a powerful force with an inexhaustible capacity for causing events. Crusoe reminds us of the culture heroes of mythology and legend who performed extraordinary,
often supernatural, deeds in their struggles with nature. But unlike
culture heroes, Crusoe does not treat nature as an antagonist and
does not try to triumph over it. To neutralize its destructive potential,
he takes protective action, such as storing his supplies in a cave or
surrounding his fields with a fence. But his cleverest strategy is to use
nature in support of his acting. 4 A model instance of this cooperation
is constructed in Crusoe's hauling of supplies from the shipwreck to
the shore. When his raft runs aground and the cargo is about to fall
into the water, Crusoe props the chests up against his back for almost
half an hour until "the rising of the Water brought me a little more
upon a Level, and a little after, the Water still rising, my Raft floated
again" (51). Crusoe's cooperation with nature does not alter the fact
that his engagement with the N-force is asymmetrical on at least two
counts. First, the N-force is more powerful, and its events (earthquake, disease, sea current) remind Crusoe again and again of its superiority. Second, because the N-force is intentionless, it can be

One-Person Worlds

equally destructive, productive, or neutral with respect to Crusoe's
ends. In contrast, Crusoe's acting, intentional and purposeful, is always productive, He is tempted into self-destructive acting only
once, in the immediate shock of his involuntary landing.5
Crusoe's resourceful projects, which create world-for-man, belong
to the most popular narratives of world literature. Crusoe follows the
path of civilization by pursuing in succession or in alternation two
kinds of productive activities: (1) he adapts objects of nature to serve
his needs-sows the seeds he has found, tames wild goats; and (2) he
produces artifacts from material provided by nature-builds a dwelling, makes furniture, sews clothing. However, before Crusoe devotes
himself to the productive activities, he acquires the basic inventory of
his world by the most primitive of all activities, gathering. He saves
from the shipwreck provisions, tools for future acting, and texts for
future reading. Thanks to this initial stock, Robinson Crusoe's world
is not, as Rousseau's romantic vision would have it "deprived ... of
all artificial aids" (1762, 53); in fact, even before the hauling is over,
Crusoe can boast of "the biggest Maggazin of all Kinds ... that ever
were laid up ... for one Man'' (55). 6
1.2.
Crusoe as rational agent. Productive praxis requires knowledge and skills. Crusoe constantly expands his knowledge of the
world by observation and experiment (trial-and-error). A patient
recording of facts leads him to uncover by induction the basic laws of
his world, for example, the character of the island's climate: "I found
now, that the Seasons of the Year might generally be divided, not into
Summer and Winter, as in Europe; but into the Rainy Seasons, and
the Dry Seasons" (rn6). Through trial-and-error Crusoe acquires the
basic cultural skill, agriculture. His first experiment is unsuccessful,
but he learns from his failure "when the proper Season was to sow"
(rn5). The rational character of Crusoe's acting is epitomized in his
decision making. At the very beginning of his solitary existence he
has to make a crucial decision: what would be the best kind of shelter, and where should it be built? The first question is settled by considering two alternatives: the dwelling could be either "a Cave in the
Earth, or a Tent upon the Earth"; ingeniously, Crusoe "resolv'd upon
39

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

both'' (58). The decision about the optimal place for the dwelling is a
consequence of the first decision.
Defoe exhibits the structure of rational acting from the initial
need to the end product: "If I wanted a Board, I had no other Way
but to cut down a Tree, set it on an Edge before me, and hew it flat
on either Side with my Axe, till I had brought it to be thick as a
Plank, and then dubb it smooth with my Adze" (68). Rational agency
is Defoe's solution to the thought experiment of solitude: even in the
most adverse circumstances, Crusoe is in control of his life because he
acts as a rational agent.
Since practical reasoning determines the course of Crusoe's acting,
failures are, as a rule, due to deficiencies in planning. Crusoe's building of the first boat is a case in point. Instead of determining exactly
how the boat will be launched, he is satisfied with a "foolish answer":
"Let's first make it, I'll warrant I'll find some Way or other to get it
along, when 'tis done" (126). This serious gap in the project's design
and reliance on improvisation causes the loss of many months oflabor. But again, Crusoe is wiser from the experience: he will build another boat in such a way that it will launch easily.
Productive activity affects not only his environment but also, reflexively, the agent himsel£ First, Crusoe's physical appearance changes as
he provides himself with dress, cap, umbrella, tools, weapons (149-50).
Second, his productive activities expand as he acquires successively
new skills (agriculture, pottery making, carpentry, and others). These
physical changes are exterior signs of a more radical change: the
transformation of an agent into a multidimensional fictional person.
1.3. Crusoe's mental life. Crusoe's mind is first and foremost a
practical mind, oriented toward acting, busy with formulating intentions, designing plans, choosing optimal alternatives. At a certain
point, however, Crusoe's inner life is substantially enriched by operations unrelated to acting, by inward-looking, self-reflective contemplation. Solitude, we are told, stimulates "self-discovery and self-realization" (Storr 1988, 21). In Crusoe's particular case, the contemplative
mind is awakened by a dream (87-88) and reinforced by memories of
the pre-island life. Still, the self-reflection is only a preparatory stage
40

One-Person Worlds
of an upward-looking, transcendental contemplation. Made impotent by a serious illness, Crusoe regains religious belief and arrives at
a mythological interpretation of his ordeal: his fate was determined
by universal laws of Christianity (92). World of man becomes God's
world.
The mythologization of the world brought about by Crusoe's
"conversion" changes the character of acting in solitude. The N-force,
Crusoe's inanimate foe and helper, is metamorphosed into an animate, supernatural partner in quasi-interaction. And when the text of
the Bible becomes the "Word of God" (96), Crusoe's reading and
praying turn into quasi-communication. In the mythological interpretation the one-person world of Robinson Crusoe has reached its
limit. Let us add that in the particular mythology that transforms
Crusoe's world, the actional and communicational exchange with the
Other remains a subjective experience; the divinity does not appear
as a person. The asymmetry that characterized the interface between
the person and the N-force before the world's mythologization is iterated in the intercourse between the person and his invisible divinity. Moreover, in the praxis of running his world the human agent remains autonomous. Crusoe's God does not interfere in human
affairs, he does not expect more than recognition of his existence and
supremacy. 7
r+ Crusoe as scriptor. When he reaches the peak of his contemplative life, religious belief, Crusoe breaks out of his solitude. His
writing (text-producing activity) serves the same function by different means. Crusoe's narrative is a personal record-a journal, later,
by necessity, changed into a summarizing report-but it is not a private text. Not unlike a captain's log, the record is destined for an absent future addressee. It is a rudimentary form of literature and will
be fully realized only when it finds its reader.
Crusoe's first-person narrative constructs the fictional world in all
its constituents and levels. 8 When the contemplative mind starts
writing, the text often passes from world construction to world interpretation. Crusoe's failure to launch his first boat, discussed earlier
as a fictional event, gives him occasion to formulate a maxim that is
41

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

set off from the narrative by a shift from the acting "I" to the universal "we": "Now I saw ... the Folly of beginning a Work before we
count the Cost; and before we judge rightly of our own Strength to
go through with it" (128). Similarly, starting from a subjective evaluation of his progress, Crusoe shifts to a universal quantifier to propose another maxim: ''As Reason is the Substance and Original of the
Mathematics, so by stating and squaring every thing by Reason, and
by making the most rational Judgment of things, every Man may be
in time Master of every mechanick Art" (68). In these and other
imaging digressions, the fictional text reaches toward the actual
world. Crusoe's solitary struggle is raised to a proof of rationalistic
philosophy, which links the fictional world of the novel to the intellectual atmosphere of Defoe's time. 9
There is only a small step from maxims to moralizing. Crusoe, the
scriptor, takes this step quite frequently, thus fulfilling the promise of
the editor's preface: to offer his report "to the Instruction of others."
Presenting his experience as a rhetoric exemplum, Crusoe reinforces
the public, literary character of his text. A monologic text addressed
to an absent reader and a one-person world oriented towards an invisible partner both result from endowing the protagonist with
"suprapractical" mental capacities-contemplation and text production. As Christian scriptor, Crusoe doubly transcends his solitude;
communicating both with a divinity and with potential (implied)
readers. The story of one person's deprivation becomes a source of
general wisdom.
At this point, a structural parallelism between Defoe's fictional
world and his fictional text comes clearly into view. The fictional
world is constructed as a gradual expansion of Crusoe's activity and
consciousness. The fictional text, itself the result of the highest productive activity, is an expanding set of discourse types. The "furnishing" of the fictional world and the writing of the fictional text are
both activities of ever increasing complexity. Robinson Crusoe demonstrates step-by-step how text writing is the art of making and understanding a world.

42

One-Person Worlds
2. "Big Two-Hearted River": The Agent in Repose

Hemingway's hero Nick Adams enters the one-person world at the
very beginning of the narrative when an auxiliary person, the baggage
man, vanishes with the departing train. Having found that "there was
no town," Nick turns to nature, to the river, which "was there" (209).
Nature will be the setting of Nick's temporary solitude. This stage
and Nick's frame of mind make this sojourn a sort of vacation: "He
had left everything behind, the need for thinking, the need to write,
other needs" (210). 10 Having no urgent needs, Nick engages in a minimum of physical and mental acts. Unlike Crusoe, who has to "furnish'' his world and, in the process, expands his mental life, Nick possesses all the provisions, tools, knowledge, and skills necessary for his
leisurely pursuits. He is not a world maker; he appropriates a world
already made.
2.1. Person and animal. Nick's physical acting during his stay in
the one-person world is restricted to the iterative actions of walking,
pitching tent, preparing meals, smoking, and fishing. Productive activities are replaced by consumer activities: Nick does not cook his
dinner, he warms up tinned food and opens a can of apricots.1 1
Nick's main activity, fishing, is for pleasure and thrill, not for satisfying need; the curtain falls on Nick's world before the catch is turned
into a meal.
Hemingway compensates for the small range of Nick's physical actions by constructing them with a considerable degree of semantic redundancy:
a. A macroactivity is constituted as an oversaturated sequence of
minimal actions. The construction of tent pitching is a telling example, and it suffices to quote just its first stage, "preparation of the
ground," to demonstrate the technique (nonactional sentences are
omitted): "[Nick] took the ax out of the pack and chopped out two
projecting roots .... He smoothed out the sandy soil with his hand
and pulled all the sweet fern bushes by their roots .... He smoothed
the uprooted earth.... He spread his three blankets. One he folded
double, next to the ground. The other two he spread on top" (214).
43

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

In the chronological and paratactical enumeration all the constituent
actions are given equal importance for the performance of the
macroact. The minimal action itself is often detailed by an explicit
introduction of the instrument: "He started a fire with some chunks
of pine he got with the ax from a stump. Over the fire he stuck a wire
grill, pushing the four legs down into the ground with his boot' (215;
emphasis added).
b. The action is coupled with its end state: "Nick sat down ...
and smoked a cigarette"/"Nick sat smoking" (211); "Nick stood
up"/"He stood with the pack on his back" (212); "Nick lay down in
the shade"/"He lay on his back'' (211-13). One and the same act is
thus presented in two different aspects, once as performance, then as
resulting state-an instance of Hemingway's favorite figure of semantic redundancy, "repetition with variation'' (see Dolezel 1971,
rno-rn2; Hily-Mane 1983, 203-14).
Iterative actions create a narrative world without dramatism. 12
Only Nick's fishing for the big trout stands out as a unique action. Its
dramatic effect is achieved by constructing the big trout as an actional partner and Nick's fishing as a duel. The duel is presaged by
the big trouts' display of prowess, observed by Nick from the bridge
(2rn), and culminates in an action exchange: ''AB he [Nick] put on
pressure the line tightened into sudden hardness and beyond the logs
a huge trout went high out of water. As he jumped, Nick lowered the
tip of the rod" (226). Neither Nick's skills nor his sophisticated instrument ensure victory in the struggle with "a power not to be held"
(226). The big trout escapes, and nature force reasserts its superiority
over an expert and perfectly outfitted human agent. It does so not
through a brute event but through elegant quasi-actions of an animal. In the duel, Nick's one-person world is pushed to the limit. Like
Defoe's divinity, Hemingway's big trout transforms the one-person
world of acting into a world of quasi-interaction. 13
2.2. Nick the expert. Nick is physically active in his leisure, but
his practical mind is constricted. This seemingly paradoxical asymmetry is due primarily to truncated practical reasoning. There is no

44

One-Person Worlds
positing and choosing of alternatives; Nick knows from experience
the optimal way of performing the iterative actions. "He knew where
he wanted to strike the river" and therefore walks in that direction
despite tiredness (212). "He wanted to make camp before he cooked"
and so pitches his tent despite being "very hungry'' (214). The bond
between intention and action is so firm that the action can be inferred from the stated intention: "He wanted them [the pegs for the
tent] long and solid to hold in the ground"; clearly, they are made
such because Nick will drive them into the ground "deep" (214).
Omission of acting as well is determined by a set negative intention:
"Nick did not want to go in there now'' and, therefore, postpones the
swamp fishing (231). "He was certain he could catch small trout in
the shallows, but he did not want them"; therefore, he "did not rebait
his hook and held it in his hand as he waded" (225). Let us note that
the counterfactual ("he could catch small trout") does not state an alternative possible action but just reasserts Nick's practical experience.
Because of his expert knowledge, Nick's acting is flawlessly executed: "He had wet his hand before he touched the trout, so he
would not disturb the delicate mucus that covered him. If a trout was
touched with a dry hand, a white fungus attacked the unprotected
spot" (225). Consequently, his iterative actions-in contrast to the
duel with the trout-are almost always successful. Failure occurs
rarely and, ironically, only when Nick has a choice in acting: knowing two ways of making coffee, he becomes confused, and the result
is not quite satisfactory (218). The automatic transition from intention to performance gives Nick's actions the character of routines.
The expert acts by following a script; the text constructing Nick's
preparing his breakfast pancake reads like a recipe: "Rapidly he mixed
some buckwheat flour with water and stirred it smooth, one cup of
flour, one cup of water" (222) .14
Just as the mental antecedents of routine acting are restricted to
bare minimum, so are its emotional effects. Euphoric but subdued
satisfaction is the reward of a successful performance: Nick is "glad"
when he gets to the river, he is "happy'' when he crawls inside the
pitched tent, he feels "awkward" but "professionally happy'' when he
45

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

puts on his fishing gear (213, 215, 223). Only the duel with the trout,
again, stands out, accompanied as it is by a complex sequence of
spontaneous, uncontrollable emotions. First Nick experiences such
an intense thrill that "his heart feeling stopped with the excitement";
when the trout is lost, Nick's mouth gets "dry," his heart is "down,"
his hand "shaky." In the dysphoria of failure Nick feels "vaguely a little sick." The recovery is most explicitly construed as spontaneous
mental process: "Slowly, the feeling of disappointment left him. It
went away slowly, the feeling of disappointment that came sharply after the thrill" (226,227). & soon as the excitement of the duel is over,
Nick's control is restored and keeps the force of spontaneity at bay.
2.3. Nick the impressionist. Nature in "Big Two-Hearted River"
plays a no less significant role than in Robinson Crusoe. The river of
the title, the rolling hills, the pine plain stretching to the distant Lake
Superior height, the swamp, the earth and the sky with their animals,
all this is given to the solitary. But nature is not an independent fictional domain; it gains entry into the world through Nick's sensory
perception. Nick's senses, particularly his eyes, shape the fictional
landscape.
The primacy of sight is established at the beginning of the text (in
Nick's watching the river) by an accumulation of verbs of ocular perception: "look," "watch," "see," "follow with his eyes." It is reinforced
by a pronounced contrast between the spontaneous "to see" and the
intentional "to look," as well as a neologism (a rare device in Hemingway's style): "half-look." We can claim, with only a slight exaggeration, that the fictional existence of a nature object depends on Nick's
seeing it, as in the case of the distant hills: "There was nothing but
the pine plain ahead of him, until the far blue hills that marked the
Lake Superior height ofland. He could hardly see them, faint and far
away in the heat-light over the plain. If he looked too steadily they
were gone. But if he only half-looked, they were there, the far-off
hills of the height ofland" (2n). The river appears and reappears up
to Nick's last look: "He looked back. The river just showed through
the trees" (232).

One-Person Worlds
Hemingway's impressionistic technique of nature construction is
most perspicuous in the orientation of the landscape toward the perceiver. The coordinates of space are determined by Nick's position;
with respect to this origo, space is divided into left and right, front
and back, proximate and distant: ''Ahead of him, as far as he could
see, was the pine plain. The burned country stopped off at the left
with the range of hills. On ahead islands of dark pine trees rose out
of the plain. Far off to the left was the line of the river" (2n). 15
Having entered through his senses, nature becomes the main
source of Nick's emotions. It generates exclusively euphoric feelings:
from the moment Nick discovers the river, he is in a state of happiness. The feeling intensifies into exaltation when he crawls out of his
tent "to look at the morning": "Nick was excited. He was excited by
the early morning and the river" (221). This is one of the peaks of
Nick's emotional life during his stay in the one-person world, the
other one set off by his duel with the big trout. Both episodes of excitement are triggered by Nick's engagement with nature, actional in
the first case, sensory in the second.
2.4. Minimal mind. A person who leaves behind "the need for
thinking" can be expected to have a restricted mental life. & we have
observed, Hemingway centers Nick's mind in two outward-oriented
domains, the practical and the sensory, and the accompanying emotions. Even these domains of mental activity are minimalized and
generally subdued. Rarely, remembering is activated, evoking short
flashbacks of camping and fishing expeditions; only the memory of
Hopkins is allowed to develop into a sketchy story. Otherwise, the
contemplative domain of the mind is gapped: Nick lacks self-reflection and imagination, offers no interpretation of his existence, has no
dreams. 16 There are no imaging digressions in Hemingway's text. A
special benefit derives from this lack: the story is entirely free of moralizing.
The gaps in Nick's mind structure do not mean that he is a primitive. His practical mind is the mind of an expert, his sensations are
focused on nature, and the contemplative mental faculties are sup-

47

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

pressed intentionally. At the end of the day, Nick's mind "was starting to work." But Nick is able to "choke it" (218) and enter the state
of the most intense repose-sleep.

3. A Rebours: Exclusive Mind
Defoe's and Hemingway's heroes find themselves in the one-person world after catastrophic events that happen against their intentions. The retreat of Huysmans's protagonist into solitude is a
planned, intentional act. Des Esseintes's "refined Thebaid" (86; 22) is
the last station of a pilgrim's regress. A well-prepared withdrawal enables the solitary to keep the services of carefully selected auxiliary
agents (the servants, the gardeners, the architect, the lapidary). The
auxiliaries contribute to the creation and maintenance of Des Esseintes's world but are not admitted into its activities.17 The solitude
is interrupted by the "London trip," a short and unsuccessful attempt
to return to the multiperson world. The end of solitude is, in contrast
to its beginning, involuntary: Des Esseintes leaves his "haven" on the
orders of his doctor (352; 213).
3.1. Against nature. The most conspicuous feature of Des Esseintes's world is the suppression of physical acting and nature.The
deletion of physical action is almost absolute. Liberated from the necessity of procuring his material needs, Des Esseintes restricts his
physical acting to drinking and eating, moving around his rooms,
leafing through his books, sorting out his prints, mixing perfumes.
Some of these activities are necessary for survival, but most of them
are simply the physical prerequisites of mental activities that constitute the solitary's life history. 18 The suppression of physical activity
does not prevent Des Esseintes from creating his environment. He
creates his environment by separating practical reasoning from productive acting: Des Esseintes decides on a design and then charges a
professional auxiliary agent with its implementation (see Sanger
1978, 171). The selection of colors, decoration, and furniture for his
Fontenay retreat is the most telling example of this "division of labor." The separation of mental designing from physical implementa-

One-Person Worlds
tion places Des Esseintes in contrast to Robinson Crusoe, a person
who, we saw, both designs and performs productive activity (I.1.2).
Nature is eliminated from the solitary's world by ideological motivation. Nature, Des Esseintes claims, "has finally and utterly exhausted the patience of refined observers by the revolting uniformity
of her landscapes and skyscapes" (107; 36). Nature's lot is to be exploited as a source of exotic materials for producing artifacts. When
its objects (the turtle, the plants) are admitted into the world designed "against nature," it is only as hybrids, looking like, or made to
look like, artifacts. To make sure that nature will not disturb the artificial environment, it is not only banned from the "thebaid" but
pushed beyond the horizon of observation. Only once, at night, -Des
Esseintes "had examined the silent landscape stretching down to the
foot of a hill" (109; 38); only twice did he open his window (137, 236;
57-58, 129), in the second case because he was forced to by dizziness.
3.2. The aesthete's mind. Having expelled nature, Des Esseintes
furnishes his world with works of art. He is highly selective in this enterprise; his elitist taste does not admit artworks "polluted" by popularity or by academic recognition. The intimate aesthetic enclosure,
surrounded by a "dark, silent and dead" outside world, is the ideal
stage for what Barbey d'Aurevilly appositely called the "history of
a mind" [l'histoire d'une a.me] (qtd. in Issacharoff 1970, 69). It is a
history of the last passion of an exhausted debauchee-of aesthetic
pleasure.
An "amateur" in the proper sense of the word (Fumaroli 1977, 32),
Des Esseintes spends long hours in communion with his favorite
books and paintings and in his own "artistic" pursuits. These activities stimulate intense sensory experiences. It is typical of Des Esseintes that he cultivates the "lower" senses, neglected by ordinary
persons: taste and smell "procure pleasures equal to those obtained
through hearing or sight" (222; n9; see Laforet 1975) . 19 Des Esseintes
is particularly fascinated by the "art of perfumery'' and becomes not
only its sophisticated practitioner but also theorist (see below). Olfactory art provides him with the highest synesthetic sensation: in
blending and alternating various scents, he creates for himself fleeting

49

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

but distinct "spectacles" of landscapes, meadows, trees, women
(228-31; 123-25). His notorious "mouth organ" is another source of
synesthesia, affording auditory (musical) sensations through taste
perceptions.
Des Esseintes's emotions are most strongly affected by music. The
"desolate music" of Schubert's Lieder "terrified and fascinated him at
the same time" (341; 205). But Des Esseintes lives before the time
when music-recorded-would enter the world of a recluse; it is
painting and poetry that provide the present impulse for aesthetic
emotions. Huysmans mobilizes all his stylistic craft to construct this
affect. In front of Gustave Moreau's "Salome," Des Esseintes experiences repeated "raptures of delight"; he feels "like the old King" "crushed, overwhelmed, dizzied" [ecrase, aneanti, pris de vertige] (152;
68; see Trudgian 1934, 235-52; Pellerin 1985, 33-38). The "radiant" figure of Melancholy in a picture by Odilon Redon dissipates, "as if by
magic," Des Esseintes's gloom; "a sweet sadness, an almost languorous sorrow would take possession of his thoughts" (160; 7 4). In contrast, the "appalling plates" of the Dutch engraver Jan Luyken made
"Des Esseintes's flesh creep ... and he remained rooted to the spot,
choking with horror" (156; 71). The emotional impact of visual art is
matched only by the "incredible charm" of Baudelaire's poetry; Des
Esseintes's "admiration for this writer knew no bounds" (260; 146).
Des Esseintes's aesthetic activities culminate in theoretical and
critical contemplation, in the formulation of a "decadent" aesthetics
and impressionistic critical judgments. Nowhere is the essence of his
aesthetic elitism revealed more clearly and definitely than in his postulate for an "ideal" novel: condensing "in a page or two" the "cohobated juice of the hundreds of pages" of ordinary novels, the perfect
work "would become an intellectual communion between a magic
writer and an ideal reader, a spiritual collaboration of a dozen superior persons scattered across the world, a treat offered and accessible
to no one but the most discerning" (331; 199). Considering Des Esseintes's predilection for the olfactory art, we are not surprised that
the most advanced part of his aesthetics is a semiotics of the "lan-

One-Person Worlds
guage" of smells, comprising a "syntax," a "dialectology," and a history (223-24; 120-21).
Governed by his aesthetic principles, Des Esseintes's criticism
sweeps over the expanse of ancient and modern art, annihilating
whole periods and displaying for admiration a few exquisite jewels.
Its most memorable achievement is a highly original reevaluation of
the Latin silver age and modern French literatures. The discovery of
the aesthetic significance of Petronius's Satyricon and of many poets
of the Latin "decadence" is matched by a precocious appreciation of
contemporary French poets, such as Verlaine, Corbiere, Mallarme,
held in contempt by the contemporary public, "incapable of understanding them'' (313; 185).
The prominent position of aesthetic theorizing in Des Esseintes's
mental life has a crucial impact on the structuring of his fictional
world: it makes it perfectly homogeneous. Idiosyncratic aesthetic theory becomes a personal ideology from which issue nonconformist
critical judgments and exquisite sensations and emotions. It determines the selection of his artworks, so that the structure of Des Esseintes's physical environment is a projection of his ideology. 2 Finally, the elitist aesthetic attitude is generalized into a philosophy of
life, epitomized in Des Esseintes's reinterpretation of Schopenhauer
(184-85; 92-93) and his sharp critique of contemporary society in all
its classes and institutions (353-61; 213-19). The aesthete's world is
perfectly homogeneous, because it is hermetically closed.
Locked in a fixed ideology and shut off from new impressions and
experiences, the "overstocked" mind starts reprocessing accumulated
information: rereading select literary monuments, reexamining favorite paintings and objets d'art, redoing familiar experiments. Even
imagination takes on a reproductive character; its aim is "to substitute the dream of reality [le reve de la realite] for reality itself" (107;
36) and to supplant "chimerical pleasures [de chimeriques delices]
similar in all respects to the pleasures of reality" (106; 35). Vividly
evoked religious scenes and ceremonies (182-83; 90-91) reveal a more
active imagination, but their goal is ultimately the same: to provide a

°

51

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

substitute religious experience in lieu of genuine religious belief. 21
Only in dreams and nightmares, such as the horrific vision of Pox
(199-203; 103-6), is the imagination, freed from logic and causality,
capable of creating original, complex, phantasmagoric images that
are indirectly (perhaps allegorically) related to Des Esseintes's experience.
Remembering plays a major role in the reproductive mind's workings. Having been admitted after some resistance (see below), it brings
forth first a rather banal memory of toothache and extraction
(140-43; 60-62). But when it begins to dominate Des Esseintes's
mental life, it reenacts entire episodes of the past: childhood, school
years, erotic and other adventures of adulthood. The only document
of Des Esseintes's poetic creativity, his "anthem," is also recalled from
the past (the "Pantin episode," 233-35; 127-29).
3.3. The revenge of nature force. Meticulously and systematically, Des Esseintes designed his world as a fortress of an exclusive
mind to keep at bay the exterior forces of nature and society and past
anxieties. Solitary existence was to be the dominion of a sovereign,
free mind that creates its environment and indulges in aesthetic pleasures. However, as the novelty of solitude begins to wear off, a different effect can be felt: "The confused mass of reading and meditation
on artistic themes that he had accumulated since he had been isolated
like a barrage to hold back the current of old memories, had suddenly
been carried away, and the flood was let loose [le flot s' ebranlait]"
(174; 84). Now we understand why Des Esseintes tried to suppress remembering. Once released, it becomes a mental force, intentionless
and uncontrollable; it disrupts the pleasures of the present by dragging in the shadows of the past. Progressively, uncontrollable forces
take over the solitary's mind. The sovereign dominion of the intentional mind is destroyed, and Des Esseintes's mental life becomes a
playground for antagonistic, spontaneously generated images, anxieties, and horrors.
The substantial weakening of Des Esseintes's control over his
mental life is brought out clearly in Huysmans's imagery: it assimilates mental activity to nature events: "current" of emotions, "torrent"
52

One-Person Worlds
of anguish, '1hurricane" of rage (342, 360; and 206; 219). This figurative influence of nature force on the functioning of the solitary's
mind is overshadowed by its increasingly strong direct impact on his
physical existence. Now it becomes clear that Des Esseintes's experiment was doomed to failure from the outset: his world cannot be
protected from the N-force because his body is a part of nature. Des
Esseintes's malady, an N-event par excellence, disregards all protective
walls, coming and going capriciously and unpredictably. AB his physical state deteriorates and his mind is defeated by growing neurosis,
aesthetic pleasures turn into pathological hallucinations. The art of
perfumery, which provided Des Esseintes with finely controlled olfactory sensations, now produces dizzying "hallucinations of the
sense of smell" (222; n8). The hallucinatory scent comes from the
outside world ("from the valley of Fontenay''), which was supposed
to be empty. Overpowered, the master of the olfactory art "fell fainting, almost dying, across the windowsill" (236; 129). The game of
splendid isolation is over. 22
3.4. The fictional and the actual. The fictional world of A Rebours is as elitist as its aristocratic protagonist and as postrealistic as
its author. But, surprisingly, its construction includes massive importation of actual-world material. The fictional "thebaid" is "furnished"
with works by actual artists. The artworks are integrated into the fictional world by becoming individuated fictional objects-books in
Des Esseintes's library, paintings on the walls of his rooms, prints in
his collection. Actual literary works are meticulously individuated as
unique volumes ranging from "a superb copy'' of the Satyricon ("in
the octavo edition of 1585 printed by J. Dousa at Leyden" [119; 44]) to
a bibliophilic volume of Mallarme's L'Apres-midi d'un faune (with
covers "made of Japanese felt as white as curdled milk ... fastened
with two silk cords, one China pink, the other black'' [329; 197]).
Because Des Esseintes's aesthetics is based on actual artworks,
Huysmans's text shows a hypertrophy of imaging digressions: antiacademic views on ancient and modern art are expounded in coherent
essays. This aesthetics is a stage in a remarkable circle of intertextuality that leads from historical text(s) to fictional text and back again.
53

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

Des Esseintes's critical history of Latin literature is a striking example
of this intertextual movement: the history written by a fictional person is a direct challenge to the academic history by an actual historian, Desire Nisard (Etudes sur les poetes Latins de la decadence), published in 1834 (see Livi 1972, 84). At the same time, Des Esseintes's
essay draws in part on Adolph Ebert's history of medieval literature
(whose first volume dealing with the early Christian Latin literature,
appeared in a French translation in 1883). This intertextuality is implicit, but the next move is explicit: in his historical work, Le Latin
Mystique (1892) Remy de Gourmont quotes the opinions of the fictional essayist Des Esseintes: "as judged by Des Esseintes" (35), "to delight Des Esseintes" (57), "to justify Des Esseintes" (66), "Des Esseintes found" (rn2). In the "Introduction," however, Des Esseintes's
essay is ascribed to Huysmans, and in the index the quoted references
are gathered under the entry, "Huysmans." In other words, de Gourmont assumes that the I-digressions in Huysmans's fictional text are
very close, even identical, to those expressed in his nonfictional criticism.23
The fate of Des Esseintes's essay confirms the basic role of imaging
digressions: it is fiction's means of judging the affairs of the actual
world. However, as Huysmans's world and text demonstrate, the
strong bond to the actual does not destroy the autonomy of the fictional: actual artworks have to be transformed into fictional objects,
and historical texts can be incorporated into the fictional text only as
digressions.

54

I

CHAPTER II

(T)

Action and Motivation

The concept of narrative world, defined by the presence of at least
one fictional person-agent (STl.1.3), enables us to leave behind the
split that traditional narratology created by separating story from
character.I A narrative semantics based on action theory radically
psychologizes the story and, at the same time, features fictional characters as persons for and in acting. Action theory (logic of action)
emerged within analytic philosophy in the 1960s and has been actively cultivated ever since. 2 Advances in cognitive psychology provide another, complementary source of inspiration for our semantics.
The one-person world is a most propitious starting point. It allows us
to avoid the common confusions that arise when action is theorized
in the standard multiperson framework. The presence in the world of
other persons obscures the necessary and sufficient features, structures,
and conditions of acting.

r. Action and Event
Von Wright, the founder of the modern logic of action, based the
concept of action on that of event and, in turn, derived "event" from
the classical concept of state (or state of affairs): event is the transfor55

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

mation of an initial state into an end state at a certain time (19636,
27-28; 1968, 37-38). 3 No less significant is von Wright's introduction
of the possible-worlds framework into action theory: from any given
initial state the agent can proceed toward two or more possible end
states. In the possible-worlds perspective a person's life history is a
vector in multidimensional space. The person-agent advances from
one node to another by bringing about or allowing to happen one of
the alternative changes available at each node. 4 "Every description of
an action contains, in a concealed form, a counterfactual conditional
statement. When we say, e.g., that an agent opened a window, we imply that, had it not been for the agent's interference, the window
would, on that occasion, have remained closed. When we say that an
agent prevented a door from closing, we thereby intimate that 'otherwise,' e.g., had it not been for the agent, the door would have
closed on that occasion'' (von Wright 1968, 43-44). In order to know
an agent's life history "we must know not only how the world actually changes, but also how it would have changed from one occasion
to the next, had it not been for the agent" (47).
The substratum of action is bodily movement: the person does
something by activating the appropriate muscles and parts of the
body, such as hands, feet, or speech organs. Physical action is overt
and observable. It is called intransitive if the bodily movement affects
just the acting person, changes his or her states, properties, and so on
(I.2.1: Nick walking toward the river). 5 Intransitive actions, together
with life-sustaining biological processes, provide the necessary conditions for the person's existence. But acting is by no means restricted
to the intransitive sort; it is first and foremost the person's engagement with the world. The agent performs transitive actions by bringing about changes in the world, by moving objects, altering their
shape, transforming one object into another, and so on. Transitive
acting is asymmetrical: the object affected by an action cannot affect
the person by an identical reaction. A person can kick a ball, but a
ball cannot kick a person. 6 The most radical changes in the world result from productive and destructive acting. In the first kind, the
agent brings a hitherto nonexistent object into existence, in the sec-

Action and Motivation
ond one, he or she annihilates an existing object. Productive actions
create artifacts, objects surviving the act and existing independently
of the agent that produced them. Through productive acting the person enhances the world by expanding the store of its objects (I.I.I:
Crusoe building a dwelling, making furniture, sewing clothing), while
destructive acting impoverishes the world. Both intransitive and transitive actions are often performed with the aid of various objects that
serve as instruments, so that we can distinguish between simple and
instrumental actions (I.1.2: Crusoe felling a tree with his ax).
Acting occurs in time, and we can make a distinction between
momentary actions requiring a minimal interval of time (I.2.1: Nick
standing up) and durative actions occupying a shorter or longer period (l.2.1: Nick smoking a cigarette). When necessary for the sake of
clarity, we designate (following von Wright 19636, 41-42, and van
Dijk 1977, 176) momentary actions as acts, durative actions as activities. When a sequence of different acts or activities or both is required
to accomplish a task, such as building a house or pitching a tent
(I.1.3, l.2.1), we speak about macroaction (macroactivity).7 Iterative
actions are usually functionally subordinate to singular actions but in
some narratives acquire prominence (see Genette 1972, 145-56).
2. Intentionality

Viewing action solely as bodily movement has been useful for differentiating its elementary kinds but does not explain it as a specific
kind of change. Both contemporary theory of action and postbehavioristic psychology have emphasized that human acting is not just
bodily movement but is necessarily linked to, or even caused by,
mental factors. 8 The proximate mental event, the one that initiates
and triggers acting, is intention. By defining action as an intentional
change of state (intentional event) our semantics accepts a view
widely held in contemporary action theory (Bernstein 1971, 269-73;
Davidson 1980, 229; von Wright 1983, 36-38; van Dijk 1977, 173;
Beardsley 1978, 181; Apter 1979, 45-49; Searle 1983, 79-m; Ajzen
1985, n-12; Coval and Campbell 1992, 1-29; Mele 1992, 4, 121-241;
57

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

Neuberg 1993, 83-86). However, intention is a puzzling notion, and
its logical status and psychological correlative have caused much disagreement. 9 The needs of narrative semantics will be satisfied if 'intention' is accepted as a primitive notion, irreducible to other mental
factors of acting, such as desires, reasons, or beliefs (see Harman 1976,
436). In other words, it is sufficient for us to follow Davidson's precept: ''An event is an action if and only if it can be described in a way
that makes it intentional" (1980, 229). Intention in and for acting orients the agent toward the future, directs him or her to proceed from
a given initial state to an anticipated end state. Because it is future
oriented, intentionality makes acting goal oriented (purposeful). To
be sure, durative actions and, especially, macroactions might require
during their performance shifts of intentions (corrections, modulations, canceling, and so on), but these tactical mental maneuvers do
not affect the strategic role of intentionality in purposeful transformations of the person's world (l.1.1; l.3-1).
Intentionality is not to be confused with conscious acting. While
persons always act intentionally, they perform many actions without
conscious awareness. This distinction can be well demonstrated in
the case of routines, actions handled automatically thanks to the
agent's inborn or acquired skills. It would be logically inconsistent to
say that when a beginning driver shifts gears in full consciousness he
or she performs an action but to deny that an experienced driver who
shifts "automatically'' performs the same action (Donagan 1987, no).
In the sequence of acting, routine actions are, as a rule, interwoven
with conscious actions, but in some cases they are foregrounded
(l.2.2: Nick's fishing). 10
Intentionality is mental property and therefore assigned to persons
and denied to inanimate objects. Animals, who play a considerable
role in narratives, pose a special problem for action theory. The conception of animal behavior depends on how much and what kind of
mental life we grant them. Today's ethology has challenged the traditional narrow view of animal intelligence, emotionality, and instinct,
but the matter is far from settled. Fortunately, fiction has been extremely liberal in the way it has constructed animals. Fictional se-

Action and Motivation

mantics follows this example by positing animals as an intermediate
category that is molded differently in different fictional worlds. In
some worlds, animals serve as objects in the pursuit of the person's
goals (l.1.1: Crusoe's goats), in others they engage in quasi-interaction
with persons (I.2.1: Nick's big trout); in the worlds of animal stories,
fairytales, fables, and so on, they become full-fledged agents, on their
own or alongside persons (V.2.1).

3. Nonintentional Events
& a universal determinant of acting, intention enables us to mark
off actions from nonactional events. Actions are flanked, on one side,
by nature events and nature processes caused by the intentionless nature force, on the other side, by accidents where intentionality is frustrated. These two categories of nonintentional events play crucial
roles in narrative fictional worlds and, therefore, deserve much more
attention in narrative theory than they have received up to now.
3.1. Nature event. Persons do not act in a static environment;
they have to cope with a multitude of occurring or potential nature
events. The never-ceasing movement of nature is due to an operative
form of the laws of nature, which our semantics denotes as nature
force (N-force) (STl.1.2). 11 N-force is a constituent of all narrative
worlds, but the degree of its intervention varies from central to marginal (I.1.1: permanent presence in Crusoe's life; I.2.1: unique dramatic intervention in Nick's fishing; l.3.3: end event of Des Esseintes's
solitude; see also IIl.1.3). The encounter between acting person and
N-force is the elemental dynamic of narrative. Two of its aspects are
of utmost importance for fictional semantics:
a. Due to the N-force's lack of intentionality, the encounter is
asymmetrical: in response to nonintentional N-events, which are beyond his or her control, the person has to design and execute appropriate intentional actions that are within his or her capacity. Faced
with destructive N-events, the person takes protective action (I.1.1:
Crusoe storing his supplies in a cave). When the N-event can be gar-

59

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

nered for the purposes of intentional acting, the person engages the
N-force in asymmetrical cooperation (I.r.1: Crusoe freeing his raft).
b. The N-force operates in conformity with natural laws, but its
effect on persons is haphazard. All persons are mortal, but the death
of a particular individual is a random event. The impact of the Nforce is strengthened by the fact that it affects the person not only externally but, primarily, internally. The person's body is the locus of
numerous biological N-events and processes that determine his or
her very existence-birth, growth, biological functions, aging, disease, death. Thus, we can say, the most crucial events of the person's
life history are outside intentionality. Surveying the world, the person
sorts its events into those that are potentially under his or her actional
control and those that he or she can do nothing about. 12 While this
polarity is best observable in physical events, it applies to mental and
social life as well (II.8; see further IIl.2.1; IIl.3-1; VIll.3).
3.2. Accident. Intentional acting, I have noted, is future oriented
and purposeful. The person performs an action in order to transform
an initial state into an intended end state. If the intended state is
achieved, the action is successful. If, however, the agent finds himself
or herself in an end state different for the one intended, an accident
has happened.13 Ordinarily, we think of accidents as failures of acting
with "sad consequences," a view prevalent in psychology, sociology,
and medicine (Kay 1971). Narrative semantics, however, needs a notion of accident that encompasses both lucky and unlucky cases (see
Reason 1979, 68-69; Rescher 1995). If the end state reached is more
favorable for the acting person than the intended state, the accident
is lucky; ifless favorable, it is unlucky. 14
The one-person world provides an excellent framework for the
study of the conditions and varieties of accidents, because interventions by other persons are eliminated and the impact of the N-force
can be bracketed. In simple (noninstrumental) actions, the source of
the accident is the agent. I speak about agential accidents, adding
that a majority of them are mistakes or errors, such as taking a wrong
direction or hitting the wrong key on a keyboard. 15 Instrumental ac-

60

Action and Motivation
cidents, in contrast, are due to a failing of the instrument used by the
agent in acting (I.2.1: Nick's fishing rod breaking).
In one respect, accidents are like N-events: they are beyond the
agent's control. The acting person is their patient, indeed, their victim. For this reason, accidents have the same aura of fatality as earthquakes or heart attacks. 16 But here the similarity ends. In N-events
no mental factor, no intention, is involved. In contrast, accidents occur only where intentional acting is pursued. They are incursions of
randomness into the realm of purposefulness.

4. Special Categories of Acting
''Accident" is one of the special categories that cluster around the
notion of acting, the others being "trying," "omission" ("forbearing"),
"letting happen," "failing," and so on. The individual members of
this family have to be introduced in relation to the core notion, as
well as in their mutual relations. Let me demonstrate this approach
by focusing on the categories of trying and omitting.
4.1. Trying is a stage in acting, together with starting, continuing, terminating, abandoning, and so on, all best displayed in durative actions (activities). Trying can be defined as truncated action: the
agent stops the performance, for whatever reason, before reaching the
intended end state. We cannot speak about trying if the action is canceled because of shift in intention. An athlete does not try to jump
two meters if, having had a change of mind, he or she does not start
running toward the lath. This conception of trying is inspired by von
Wright's and Danto's. Von Wright links trying to "preventive interference": "If the preventive interference occurs within the specious
present of the action but after the agent has commenced acting (set
himself to act, embarked upon the road to the end), then we usually
describe the case by saying that he tried but failed to accomplish the
thing" (1983, 28). Danto uses the image of "the abrupt paralysis, the
shadow fall[ing] between doing and deed" that is responsible for "an
incomplete performance: a truncated event" (1973, 77). Some philosophers claim that every action presupposes trying. While this may be
61

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

true in a strictly formal sense, we commonly use "the 'language of attempts' only when there is doubt (in our minds) as to whether the action will be, is being, or has been successfully carried out" (Zimmerman 1984, 192).
4.2. "Omission," "forbearance," and "negative action'; are different designations for a complex and perplexing category. All of the
nonactions can be comprehended only within a possible-worlds
framework. Omission to act is a serious issue in moral and legal philosophy, because it relates to the agent's responsibility. The basic
question asked in this context is "whether there is a significant and
clearly identifiable difference between the concepts of actively doing
something and passively letting it happen'' (Walton 1980, 319). The
equivalence of omission and acting is denied by those philosophers
who claim that "omissions have no consequences, since they lack the
required causal efficacy'' (Weinryb 1980, 3). Narrative semantics
should judge omissions on logical rather than ethical grounds. In
principle, omission is equivalent to acting if two conditions are satisfied: (1) the refraining from acting is intentional; and (2) the person
has the ability and opportunity to perform the corresponding action.
In other words, the agent must intentionally omit to do what he
could do in the given circumstances, or he must let something happen that he could prevent by acting (for a similar view, see von
Wright 19636, 45-48; Rehbein, 1977, 229-30; Gorr 1979; Green 1979;
Zimmerman 1984, 166-69). The first condition is a consequence of
the universal intentionality of acting: if omission is to be classed as a
kind of act, it has to be intentional. It makes little sense to speak
about nonintentional omissions, since the number of such nondoings at any point of the agent's history is practically unlimited. The
second condition stipulates that the concept of omission can be applied only to the range of the actions that are in the agent's purview. 17
The agent has to have at his or her disposal the alternative to act or
not to act (I.2.2: Nick not fishing in the swamp).
Special categories of acting play significant and multifarious roles
in the structuring of narratives but have been neglected by narratologists. Our sketch of "trying" and "omission'' should stimulate further

Action and Motivation
investigations, both theoretical and analytical, which would fill a major gap in narrative semantics.

5. Motivation
Intention is the defining and universal condition of acting, but it
is rarely declared by agents and is, therefore, unnoticed by observers
of acting (see Neuberg 1993, 83-84). We are faced with a curious discrepancy: while in the philosophy of action the problem of intentionality is at the center of interest, empirical studies of acting,
including narratology, have hardly noticed its existence. This discrepancy becomes less puzzling if we recognize that intention is a
necessary, but not sufficient, condition of acting. Action in context,
in its link to the person-agent and its societal embedding, is molded
by mental factors beyond intentionality. These factors, designated by
the general term motivation, determine "the choice, the intensity and
the persistence of activities" (Birch and Veroff 1966, rn). While intention is undifferentiated and ungraded, motivational factors are diverse in both quality and quantity. Because they are habitual features
of a person's character, they produce regularities in acting, modes of
acting characteristic of individuals and personality types. Whereas
intention delimits the domain of acting from nonactional events,
motivation is the key to understanding the diversity of acting, the
why and how of actions. The study of motivational factors is to become an important part of a semantics of fictional narrative. And we
will look to motivational psychology for inspiration. ts
5.1. Influential trends in twentieth-century psychology restricted
motivational factors to drives (instincts, Triebe), such as hunger,
thirst, sexual drive, and avoidance of pain. This limitation is still apparent in Birch and Veroff's taxonomy (1966), which proposes seven
motivational systems. 19 The psychologists claim that their systems
taken together "account for most of man's significant recurrent behaviors," a claim based on the fact that drives are "mandatory," that is,
almost automatically lead to characteristic (satisfying) actions: hunger
- eating; thirst - drinking. 20 More recently, motivational psycho!-

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

ogy has expanded substantially the set of motivational systems and
restricted drives to "the maintenance of the body and the propagation
of the species" (Izard 1977, 164; see also Deci 1980). This is a major
event in the psychology of acting with far-reaching consequences.
Narrative semantics especially appreciates that the newly legitimated
(or, rather, rehabilitated) motivational factors include the cognitive
and the emotional capacities of persons.
5.2. The cognitive system of motivation harks back to the ancient idea of practical reasoning. It was formalized in Aristotle's practical syllogism, a deductive schema with the major premise expressing
the person's desire, the minor one stating the presence of the desired
object; the conclusion leads to (or is) an action: "For example. Let me
drink (desire says). This is a drink (imagination or perception or
thought says). lmmedia~ely, he drinks" (De motu 701a 28 ff.; qtd.
from Charles 1984, 90; see also Hintikka 1974, 89-91; Schick 1991,
9-21).
Following Anscombe (1957), von Wright modernizes the schema
of "practical inference"; it consists of the statement of an end, an action leading to this end, and, finally, the intention to perform that action (1983). At the same time, it has been recognized that practical
syllogism is only one of the cognitive factors of acting (see Hintikka
1974, 94-102). The main lesson to be drawn from the Aristotelian
heritage is that all processes of knowledge acquisition and representation-sensory perception, belief, information processing, evaluation,
theoretical thought, and so on-motivate acting. Present-day cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence research demonstrate that
persons apply the cognitive capacities at all stages of acting, in goalsetting, in formulation and selection of alternatives, in monitoring of
performance, and in evaluation of results. Two cognitive factors are
especially important for narrative semantics:
a. Decision making (I.1.2: Crusoe deciding on the best kind of
shelter) is a procedure inherent in the possible-worlds conception of
acting: If from any given initial state the agent can proceed toward
two or more possible end states, then he has to determine which of

Action and Motivation
the alternatives is best (optimal, most desirable) in the given circumstances (Donagan 1987, 44; see also Davidson 1980, 234-37; Aune
1977, 131-42; Daval 1981, 8, 193-96). 21
b. Many compound acts and activities, such as eating in a restaurant or taking a trip, follow a "prescribed" sequence. Artificial intelligence research has put much emphasis on this factor and differentiates between conventionalized scripts and individually prepared plans
(designs) (see Brand 1984, 204-21; Velleman 1989, 215-40). Scripts do
not necessarily restrict acting to one stereotype; for many activities
"hypothetical scripts" are available, charting alternative courses of
acting (Abelson 1976, 35). Scripts and plans serve as guides for individual acting (l.2.2: Nick preparing his breakfast pancakes) and become indispensable in the pursuit of complex social activities.
5.3. Emotions have regained their status as powerful motivational
factors but continue to elude theoretical grasp. Despite enormous literature on the topic, a fairly recent monograph puts it quite bluntly:
"Nothing about the emotions is really well understood, in any strong
sense of understanding" (de Sousa 1987, xix). The principal reason is
the difficulty of describing in objective terms the subjective experiential (phenomenological) nature of emotions. Emotionality is the one
domain of psychology where a developed fictional semantics could be
more giving than receiving. Indeed, fictional constructs of emotions
enjoy much popularity among philosophers and psychologists and
are often evoked instead of, or in addition to, actual cases. 22
The traditional approaches to emotions (summarized, for example, by Lyons [1980, 1-52] and de Sousa [1987, 37-46]) seem to be reductionist; emotions are analyzed by being eliminated. The Cartesian
view reduces emotions to (bodily) sensations, the behaviorist view to
operant behavior, the psychoanalytic to suppressed drives, the cognitive to beliefs and evaluations, the contextualist to conventional consent. In contemporary philosophy and psychology, however, emotionality is treated as an autonomous mental (motivational) force.
Philosophy has drafted a model of the mind in which emotions "are
not reducible to more primitive faculties or functions" and take their

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

own place alongside perceptions, beliefs, and wants (de Sousa 1987,
xvi, 19). Psychology has set emotions apart from their most common
cover-up, the drives. Thus, for example, the "unpacking" of the aggression drive reveals an independent motivating emotion-anger. 23
Izard went so far as to promote "the emotion system" to "the primary
motivational system for human beings over the life span" (1979, 167;
1977, 3, 43-44).

It is commonly believed that emotions are aroused by objects and
events in the world and in this sense are intentional. Danto claims
that "there is not feeling which is not the feeling 'of' something"
(1973, 155). He strengthens his case by distinguishing between a basic
case, where the object of emotion is a particular (sadness at losing a
parent, the desire for a flower, excitement over a work of art) (I.3.2),
and "more abstract cases," where the emotion~ "tinge the whole
world for the sufferer" (spleen, melancholy). Abstract emotions easily
translate into "philosophical postures in which depression or anxiety
have as objects the whole of reality, taken as absurd or empty or fearful" (1973, 160). 24 But Danto's fine analysis could also serve to support the claim for objectless emotions. After all, his abstract emotion
resembles strongly some fictional constructs where the "sufferer" is
not linked to the world but is rather divorced from it (I.3.4: Des Esseintes's anxieties).
Intentionality of emotions is closely linked to the controversy over
whether persons have power over their emotions, that is, whether
they are capable of inducing, maintaining, or suppressing them.
Danto has argued in the negative: "The will is (which means that we
are) impotent to do our feelings: we are in their grip (slaves of passion), and though we may dissolve them or induce them through
causes, and so attain a degree of indirect mastery over them, we are,
basically, impotent to have or not to have them" (1973, 151). Lyons
vacillates between the view of emotions as "unpremeditated reactions" and the belief that "there are a number of ways in which we
can control our emotions" (1980, 185, 193, 196-200). Izard (1977,
50-53) points out both the "restrictions" and the "freedoms" of the
emotional system. De Sousa's analysis leads to a similar result. Hav-

66

Action and Motivation

ing asserted the rationality of emotions, de Sousa nevertheless comes
to the conclusion that they fluctuate between "the rational and the irrational, the objective and the subjective, the active and the passive,
the real self and the persona, and even determinism and indeterminism" (1987, 17). Such a dynamic solution-emotionality is a mental
domain where spontaneity and control clash-is necessary for fictional semantics. Fictional persons experience both intentionally cultivated and spontaneously arising emotions, often alternating with
dramatic fluidity (l.2.2: Nick's emotional turmoil during the duel
with the big trout; l.3.2: Des Esseintes's aesthetic emotions; see also

111.1.2).
The remarkable qualitative variety of emotions has challenged
philosophy and psychology for centuries. Traditional lists of emotions have been supplanted by structural matrices, proposed both by
psychologists (De Rivera 1977, 38-74; Apter 1989, 184-190) and by
semioticians (Parret 1986). These models are attempts to penetrate
through the indefiniteness and complexity of emotions to a more
manageable "deep structure." But the logic of the matrix often requires that some slots be filled by terms that do not designate emotions or, on the contrary, that commonly experienced emotions be
omitted. Thus, in Apter's matrix we find an emotion called virtue,
but love and hatred are missing. Narrative semantics will be well
served by accepting the concept of basic emotions, proposed already
by John Locke and developed in contemporary psychology. Epstein
gives one list-fear, anger, sadness, joy, love, affection (1983, 99);
Izard gives a somewhat different one-interest-excitement, joy, surprise, distress-anguish, anger, disgust, contempt, fear, shame, guilt
(1977, 83-92). 25 From the basic emotions, composite ones are derived
by combinations (fusions); jealousy, for example, is a blend of love
plus hatred plus fear (see Neu 1980).
These and similar classificatory attempts assume that emotions
form a system of correlations. The most venerable pairs are those of
euphoric (pleasurable, positive) and dysphoric (unpleasurable, negative) emotions: joy/sadness, love/hatred, admiration/contempt, excitement/fear, mirth/anger, and so on (l.2.3; l.3.2). The dichotomy

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

turns into a triad if we include the absence of emotion, a "zero"
emotion-apathy. Arranging emotions into oppositions should not
obscure the ambivalence of emotions, a coalescence of opposites (love
+ hatred). This puzzling property extends into their motivational potential: on different occasions, one and the same emotion may bring
about different, even contradictory, actions (see Izard 1977, 8-9). The
law of the excluded middle does not apply to emotional life.
In the quantitative aspect, intensity, emotions range from ardor to
apathy. Narrative semantics can make good use of the English-language offer to designate the emotions of highest intensity as passions. 26 Substantial diversities in temperament (the affective dispositions of persons) make the intensity of emotions a personal
characteristic. "Some people are readily aroused to feel emotion, and
their emotions are strong and difficult to keep under control. Others
are more placid, and their emotions are relatively weak" (Vernon
1969, 83). The same diversity applies to the motivational force of
emotions. In general, passions are more likely than weak emotions to
lead to acting, but the individual's actional response to emotional
motivation depends very much on his or her personality structure:
excitable temperaments easily translate emotions into acting, but
"strong" personalities can omit or suppress acting even under the
pressure of very intense emotions-Ricoeur's "energie subie" (1977,
90) (see 111.1.4, on the power of passion).
Emotions are often accompanied by spontaneous physiological
events, such as increased pulse rate, palpitations, twitches, and so on.
When the events are observable (blushing, sparkling eyes, gestures) or
audible (laughing, crying, exclamation of pain, tone of voice), they
become signs (indices) of emotions (crying= grief, laughter= joy).
These expressive events ("affect displays," "body clues") are mostly
nonintentional but can also be acted out intentionally and used in a
deceptive, concealing, or insincere manner (see Portch 1985, 9-rn).
Psychologists and anthropologists have been engaged in a prolonged
controversy about the universality or cultural specificity of the physical expressions of emotions (for a summation, see Evans 1989,
139-40). Having studied facial displays, Ekman has come to the con68

Action and Motivation

clusion that as symptoms of some basic emotions (such as happiness,
surprise, fear, anger) they are universal, but the facial displays of other
emotions seem to be culture specific (1980, 97-99). 27 Whether universal or culture specific, expressive behavior is regulated by learned
cultural habits and by the personality structure. This principle applies
especially to expressive verbalization. 28 The "reading" of manifest
symptoms (both bodily events and speech acts) is a popular method
of inferring a person's emotional state. Conversely, the symptoms are
a powerful device for constructing fictional emotions: inner, inaccessible subjective emotional states are posited indirectly by their observable or audible "objective correlatives" (Eliot 1950, rno) (see
Vl.3.3).
Every person at any time can experience a number of emotions.
Compatibility of emotions increases their motivational power. Yet often a person's emotional life is charged with schiwid tension between
incompatible emotions or by ambivalent ("mixed") emotional attitudes toward one and the same object (see Greenspan 1980; Storr
1988, IOI). These tensions give rise to motivational conflict; the person's ability to act may be permanently impaired or, at least, action
deferred until the conflict is resolved.
Emotions show remarkable dynamism: they appear and disappear,
and their intensity might fluctuate wildly. Changes in the objects and
in the intensity of emotions are crucial events in a person's life history, leading to substantial shifts in the course of his or her acting.
Obviously, less intense emotions are more prone to change, whereas
passions tend to become ingrained. Painful and prolonged withdrawal symptoms provide most of the drama in the death or agony of
passion.
5.4. Motivational systems-drives, emotions, cognitive factors
-can be isolated in theory, but in the practice of living they operate
jointly, in clusters (see Kuhl and Beckman 1985, IOI). They fuse into
motivational clusters, complex and entangled propellers of acting
(IIl.3-1, IV.2.4). If the cluster includes contradictions, motivational
conflicts arise. The person is pulled in opposite directions, and a serious disruption of acting ensues. Davidson, who called this conflict

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

"the Medea Principle" (1982, 294), is skeptical about its logical legitimacy since it involves a clash between rationality and an "alien force."
If, however, we transcend the persistent linking of acting to rationality, typical of Western philosophy (see below), and posit several motivational systems, then nothing "alien" is involved in the conflict.
Motivational conflict is, I believe, at the core of the most notorious irregularity in acting, so-called akrasia (incontinence or weakness
of will). In action theory, this puzzling phenomenon has been discussed since antiquity; in narrative semantics, it has yet to be mentioned. For the ancient philosophers, akrasia became a cause celebre
because it stood out as a paradox within their rational philosophy of
acting. According to practical syllogism, the agent selects the action •
optimal in the given circumstances and then performs it. How, then,
can a reasoning person become an akrates, pursuing a course of action
that is detrimental to his or her interests? 29 By understanding akrasia
as motivational conflict, an answer to these questions can be suggested: a "correct" intention resulting form the person's practical deliberation is not carried out; it is overridden by the agent's drive or
passion, and an "incorrect" action is performed. This interpretation
of akrasia satisfies Davidson's desire to dissociate it from moral considerations (1980, 30) but avoids the logician's plight to explain it
within a strictly rational conception of acting. The akrates's acting is
a manifestation not of irrationality but of an irreconcilable discordance within his or her motivational cluster.30

6. Action Modes
A theory of acting, pursued in this chapter, makes overt physical
action conditional on covert mental states or events. The character of
an action is determined not so much by what is done as why it is
done. Searching for the explanation of a particular action, we search
for its motive. There is no question about the need and usefulness of
this search. However, motivational systems provide a means to proceed beyond the explanation of particular actions to understanding
regularities in the conduct of acting. My semantics treat these regu-

Action and Motivation
Schema 1
Rational

Impulsive

Akratic

Irrational

Insane

larities under the label of action modes. I propose a taxonomy of four
action modes, represented in circular schema (schema 1); the pointer
from the lowest node leads into the domain of pathology.
Rational acting (Miller, Galanter, and Pribram 1960; Jeffrey 1965;
Grether 1980; Audi 1993, 281-318) is determined by cognitive motivational factors. It has often been considered the essential human mode
of acting, since it is guided by reason, supposedly the highest, and exclusively human, mental capacity. The concept of free agent makes
sense only within this mode: the person has control over his or her
acting if his or her reason (ratio) is in control (Pears 1984, 15) (I.1.2:
Crusoe's control over his world). The rationality of acting is not dependent on the duration of its cognitive preparation. Building a
cathedral and slamming on the car brakes are both rational actions;
yet the first activity requires long and meticulous designing, while the
second is performed instantaneously, thanks to the agent's routine
skills.
Impulsive acting is motivated by drives and in some respects is the
opposite of rational acting; it is spontaneous, unpremeditated, quite
often reflex stimulated. Under the pressure of drives, the person's
71

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

control over his or her acting is minimized.3 1 This formulation respects the fact that in the social world of cultural training drives do
not automatically lead to acting. Acting motivated by emotions fluctuates between the rational and the impulsive modes. Because of
their polarity (II.5.3), emotions are flexible motivational factors. They
can submit to reasoning or suppress it. They decrease agential control
in different degrees, depending on the kind, duration, and intensity
of the emotion, on its object, on the person's temperament and overall personality structure, and so on.
Moving in the opposite direction along schema r, we encounter
akratic acting, which, as already defined (ll.5.4), flouts rationality.
The person is aware of the rational path but is deflected from it under the pressure of drive or passion. Both directions of the circle lead
to the zone of irrational acting. According to Davidson the concept
of irrational acting involves a logical paradox: "There is a conflict between the standard way of explaining intentional action and the idea
that such an action can be irrational" (1982, 293). In representing irrational acting as the extreme point of a dynamic typology we avoid,
I believe, Davidson's "paradox of irrationality." We can say that irrational acting is a mode where the import of cognitive factors and
practical reasoning is minimal. 32 But it is precisely this minimum
that prevents a total annihilation of intentionality. Only in insanity,
where the person's mind is severely impaired or even destroyed, is intentionality null and void. Insane behavior is semantically identical
to nature events. When intentionality disintegrates, nature force
takes over.

7. Mental Acts and Spontaneous Generation
The concepts of intentionality and motivation define the "outwardly'' oriented domain of the mind, the practical mind directing,
controlling, and monitoring acting and its results (see Hintikka 1974,
80). There are, however, mental operations that have no connection
with acting-the "inward-looking" workings of the contemplative
mind (I.1.3: Crusoe's transcendental contemplation; l.2.4: Nick's
72

Action and Motivation

minimal contemplations; l.3.2: Des Esseintes's aesthetic contemplation). In contemplation persons construct mental images of their
past, possible futures, and alternative presents; they interpret their
world, life, and existence, formulating a more or less consistent, totalizing personal ideology, philosophy, religion, myth (IY.2.2).
The operations of the practical mind, such as practical reasoning,
decision making, calculation, planning, scripting, and the like, are
prototypes of mental acts. 33 In contrast, the contemplative mind,
having no actional commitment, is free to spontaneously generate
mental events (processes). The polarity of intentional acting and
spontaneous generation is thus introduced into the model of the
mind. Although the origin of these modes of operation is associated
with the practical and the contemplative mind, their scope is not. All
mental faculties, from sensory perception to emotionality to thinking
to remembering and imagination, operate between the poles of intentional acting and spontaneous generation (I.1.2; I.2.3; l.3.3-4).34
The spontaneous generation of mental events appears as a work of
intentionless mental force that. overwhelms the person's mind with
obsessive thought, automatic mental images and associations, fantastic daydreams, stream-of-consciousness displays (I.3.4; 111.2.4). Its
purest manifestation is the dream, mental imaging in sleep, over
which the person has no control. 35 It is not difficult to see that in
their semantic structure mental acts are analogous to physical actions,
whereas mental events (processes) are similar to nature events, especially to the biological processes occurring in the person's body. Physical actions and mental acts are intentionally done by the person;
physiological and mental events, caused by intentionless forces, happen to him or her. Action theory starts by presupposing the duality
of body and mind, but the act/ event contrast, cutting across this
duality, reasserts the unity of the acting person.

73

I

CHAPTER III

(A)

Multiperson Worlds

The one-person world, although theoretically simulating, is quite
limited in its narrative potential. The most fertile ground for narrative is the fictional world where two or more persons, potential
agents, are present. The persons' interaction, individually or in
groups, is the prime source of stories. The works of three major European writers, EM. Dostoevsky, Charles Dickens, and Milan Kundera, provide us with the first insights into the narrative complexity
and plasticity of the multiperson world.

The Idiot: Agents Losing Control
The Idiot (1874) is probably the least understood of Dostoevsky's
major novels. Interpreters have had difficulty with its unorthodox
structure, so different from the well-arranged patterns of the other
novels. 1 Many critics, prompted by Dostoevsky's casual remark that
he wanted to write a novel about a "wholly beautiful" or "wholly
good" man, do not proceed beyond this cliche about its archetypal
hero. 2
1.1.
Coming together. The one-person worlds of Robinson Crusoe, Nick Adams, and Des Esseintes came into existence through the
74

Multiperson Worlds
elimination of all potential coagents. The construction of a multiperson world requires just the opposite: to assemble a group of persons
(minimally two) for face-to-face contact. To form the agential constellation of The Idiot, Dostoevsky first resorrs to the popular device
of travel: prince Myskin, on his return to Russia from Switzerland,
meets Rogozin and Lebedev on the Warsaw-Petersburg train (bk.1,
chap.1). They parr upon arrival, but their contact will prove to be
permanent: Rogozin will join Myskin in the small set of protagonists,
Lebedev will become a member of the more numerous group of secondary characters. Other fictional persons who will play significant
roles in the world are introduced on the same occasion, but in absentia: the Jepancin family and Nastasja Filipovna are topics of conversation, and Nastasja's portrait is shown by Rogozin; some minor future agents are at least mentioned (Pavliscev, Konyov, Lichacov). The
next stage in the constellation formation is the prince's visit to the
Jepancin family (chaps. 2-7). Servants, the secretary Ganja, and the
whole Jepancin family (the general, his wife, and their three daughters) all engage in conversation with Myskin. Yet by several inconspicuous moves the relationship between Myskin and the youngest
daughter, Aglaja, becomes special; at the end of the visit Aglaja selects
the prince as her confidant (informing him about Ganja's courrship).
Moreover, in a casual remark an indirect relationship between Aglaja
arid Nastasja Filipovna is established when Myskin, not suspecting
any trouble, compares Aglajas beautiful face with that of her future
rival (66; 98).
At this point, all the protagonists have entered the fictional world
in person, with the exception of Nastasja Filipovna. Dostoevsky reserves for this exceptional heroine an exceptional means of gradual
introduction. First, she is the topic of conversation-she is a verbal
sign. Second, presented through her portrait, she becomes a pictorial
sign. 3 Only in the third stage does Nastasja Filipovna appear in person, when she unexpectedly visits the lvolgin apartment and takes
Myskin for a servant (86; 123).
As the story unfolds, the protagonists form a double "triangle of
desire," with the hero, Myskin, as its pivot (see Miller 1981, 219-20):

75

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

Myskin

. /
~ Agap
1.
N astasJa
~ D
v•
J:'-Ogozm
This quartet plays out the tragedy of The Idiot.
r.2. Fragile links. The positions of the protagonists in the agential constellation remain fixed for the duration of the story
(Holthusen 1969, 9); but their connections, dominated by the ambiguous love/hate emotional relation, are unstable and subject to sudden reversals (see Dalton 1979, 96-99). Dostoevsky elaborates in detail the ·reversals in the Myskin-Rogozin link. In a moment of
closeness, the two rivals exchange their crosses and become "brothers"; Rogozin asks his mother to bless the prince "just as if it was your
own son." And, in the ultimate gesture of friendship, Rogozin
"cedes" Nastasja Filipovna to Myskin (bk.2, chap.4). Since the text
keeps meticulous track of time, we know that this scene occurs at half
past two in the afternoon. Around seven o'clock the prince returns to
his hotel and is confronted by Rogozin, who tries to kill him. Within
a short period of four and a half hours, brotherhood swings to murderous hostility. But the Myskin-Rogozin relationship reverts to
brotherhood again at the end of the novel, when the two stay together in night wake for the murdered Nastasja (bk.4, chap.n). They
are separated by force, to be sent to different kinds of exile, Rogozin
for his crime to Siberia, Myskin for his idiocy to Switzerland.
Nastasja Filipovna's vacillation between Rogozin and Myskin, her
running away from one to the other and back again, is the most conspicuous manifestation of emotional instability. Her passional swings
end only when she is killed by Rogozin. Myskin himself vacillates between Nastasja Filipovna and Aglaja. When Nastasja leaves Rogozin,
he accepts her in Moscow with love-pity (bk.2, chap.3). But later, deserted by Nastasja, he proposes to Aglaja and almost becomes her fiance (bk.4, chap.5). In the final turn, rejected by Aglaja, he is about
to marry Nastasja Filipovna, only to be abandoned at the last moment before the wedding (bk.4, chap.IO). Aglaja's emotional swings

Multiperson Worlds
are, perhaps, the most sudden. For some time, she makes contradictory statements about her attitude toward Myskin but finally declares
unequivocally her love for him (472; 584); only a few minutes later,
she leaves him forever with a terrible look of suffering and hatred, being unable to accept "even a brief moment of his hesitation" (475;
588). Similar contradictions and reversals mark the relationship of
Nastasja Filipovna and Aglaja; in her letters to Aglaja, Nastasja expresses friendship and affection (bk.3, chap.IO), but in their momentous face-to-face confrontation the two women have nothing for each
other but words of spite and hatred (bk.4, chap.8).
r.3. Overcome by passion. The radical shifts in the personal links
are manifestations of the intense emotionality of Dostoevsky's protagonists. Bonds between passionate persons are unstable, because
they are constantly threatened by their unpredictable and uncontrolled impulsive actions. The rational antecedents of acting are minimized: the crucial deeds of the heroes and heroines of The Idiot are
unreflected leaps from desire or despair to physical or verbal acts. At
one point, the text, shifting from narrative to imaging digression and
back, spells out the contrast between practical reasoning and unreflected impulse. The prince "was anxious to think over, and decide
about, a certain step. But that 'step' was not one of those one thinks
over, but of those which one precisely does not think over, but settles
on: he was suddenly overcome by a strong desire to leave everything
here and go back to where he had come from, to some far-away solitary place" (256; 326). 4 The passions and drives that motivate the acting of Dostoevsky's character are volatile, appearing, disappearing,
changing arbitrarily on the spur of the moment. At a certain point,
Mrs Jepancin becomes so irritated by Myskin's behavior that she forbids him ever to enter their house again; a few moments later, driven
by a contrary impulse, "she suddenly pounced on the prince, seized
him by the arm, and dragged him after her" [to their house] (268;
340). This is a minor incident, but it indicates what kind of acting
decides the fate of the novel's protagonists. Even when impulsive acting is triggered by the best intention, it turns, usually, destructive or

77

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

self-destructive. In Dostoevsky's :fictional world, impulsive acting is
often indistinguishable from akrasia. 5
The impulsive and irrational personal confrontations combine
wih random interventions of the nature force to create a chaotic :fictional world.6 The nature force intervenes most drastically in
Myskin's epileptic :fits, biological events that instantaneously cancel
whatever intentions he was pursuing. The agent is turned into a patient, uttering involuntary screams and twisting in spasmodic convulsions. Myskin's epilepsy, like Des Esseintes's unspecified disease, is
latent and thus ever threatening; it takes command of him randomly,
for no apparent or known reason. Myskin's epileptic seizures occur at
two crucial points in the story, once saving the prince from Rogozin's
knife (bk.2, chap.5), the second time wrecking his reputation at the
Jepancins' party (bk.4, chap. 7). Myskin's very existence as an acting
person is temporary, delimited by a prehistory and a posthistory of
idiocy, a state where the nature force destroys his mind and his capacity for acting.
Madness, the ultimate manifestation of nature's pathological impact on persons, permeates the world of The Idiot both as a :fictional
fact and as a :figure of speech. Myskin's "literal" insanity, the initial
and the end state of his story, is the source of the :figure of madness,
attached to many persons and incidents in the novel. Thus Myskin,
although temporarily sane, is repeatedly called "idiot"; Nastasja Filipovna's as well as Rogozin's acting is often explained by "madness"
(for example, in the quoted episode at the end of book 1). Both literally and :figuratively, Dostoevsky's :fictional world hovers precariously
between sanity and madness.
1.4. The "hideous scenes." The strains of impulsive, akratic, and
"insane" acting converge to create the peak interactional episodes of
The Idiot, the scandals,? Shortly after entering the :fictional world,
Myskin is drawn by accident into one of its most complex and remarkable exhibits (bk.1, chaps.8-rn). He has just taken up lodgings
at the lvolgins' and hardly knows the members of the family. Nevertheless, he is not spared from witnessing a dispute in which a delicate
family matter is aired, Ganja lvolgin's possible marriage to Nastasja

Multiperson Worlds
Filipovna. The family, especially Ganja's sister, is strongly opposed to
the prospect. The verbal exchange becomes more and more impassioned and hostile, until Ganja is overcome by anger and starts acting
"without any restraint and with almost a growing enjoyment, no
matter where it may lead him' (86; 121).
At that critical moment and in a most unusual way (III.1.1), Nastasja Filipovna herself enters the apartment. Her impertinent remarks
and offensive laughter further increase the tensions between the participants of the scene. The verbal conflict is on the brink of becoming physical assault-against the most innocent person, the bystanding prince: ''All Ganja's spite seemed suddenly to turn against the
prince: he seized him by the shoulder and looked at him in silence,
vindictively and with hatred, as though unable to utter a word. A
general commotion ensued" (88, 124).
At the last moment, Ganja "recovered his self-possession," and
physical violence is averted. A brief respite is provided by General
lvolgin, who offers a sample of his impulsive lying. In the meantime,
two other persons make their appearance, Kolja and Ferdyscenko, enlarging the set of spectators. The next, more violent wave of the scandal begins to surge when another uninvited and unexpected visitor
appears-Rogozin. With Rogozin's entourage the group of spectators
turns into a "chorus" (95; 133). When Rogozin notices Nastasja Filipovna, "he turned so pale that his lips went blue" (96; 133). The subdued passions are ready to burst out and bring about the climax of
the scandal.
The escalation begins when Rogozin asks a strictly private question in front of the gathered crowd: Will Nastasja Filipovna marry
Ganja Ivolgin or will she not? Against all expectation, Nastasja's answer is negative, giving Rogozin the opportunity to continue the
scene in a most original manner-by "bidding for" Nastasja Filipovna. As he increases the amount of money offered, the scene becomes "extremely disgraceful." Rogozin, "in ecstasy," is called "mad"
and "drunk" (98; 136). All the participants of the interaction have
now lost control and exchange insults, screams, and cries. When
Varja calls Nastasja Filipovna "a shameless woman," the scandal

79

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

reaches the level of physical violence, earlier averted. Ganja "in a fury
threw himself on Varja and violently seized her hand"; Varja, "beside
herself, suddenly spat in her brother's face" (98-99; 136-37). Only
then does Myskin intervene; protecting Varja, he receives Ganja's retaliatory blow. The prince's response to this physical attack is astonishing: "he covered his face with his hands, went to a corner of the
room, stood with his face to the wall, and said in a faltering voice:
'Oh, how ashamed you'll be of what you've done!"' (99; 137). These
words and the omission of physical retaliation are so incongruous
with the structure of the scandal that they bring about its collapse. In
a "friendly'' denouement Nastasja Filipovna kisses Mrs. lvolgin's hand
and leaves the apartment.
All ingredients, stages, and patterns of the scandal as a special kind
of interaction are displayed in this episode. It begins rather inconspicously as the private encounter of a small group of fictional persons who meet to discuss a delicate, controversial matter. But the private event becomes a public spectacle when a crowd of outsiders
gathers around the original group. The scandal is obviously modeled
on theatrical performance, where spectators are allowed to witness intimate exchanges staged by the fictional persons of the dramatic
world. The scandal's basic structure is a sequence of antagonistic
semiotic acts, particularly verbal and gestural, which become more
and more heated and hostile. As the participants lose control over
their passions and succumb to impulsive, irrational, and akratic acting
and as new, unexpected agents intervene, the conflict escalates and
reaches its furious climax in physical violence. As a concert of uncontrolled passions, violent words, and senseless acts, the Dostoevskian scandal exhibits supremely the potential of rational beings for
irrational acting.
1.5.
Crime of passion. Scandal is an effective means for bringing
out into the open the hidden, suppressed thoughts, passions, and relationships of fictional persons. When persons lose control over their
acting, their "soul" is exposed (Bachtin [1929] 1984, 175). Paradoxically, at this depth, the intention and motivation of the person's ac-

80

Multiperson Worlds
tion is muddled and incomprehensible. Since there are no reasons for
impulsive acting, it cannot be explained by reason.
The most crucial event of the novel, Rogozin's murdering Nastasja
Filipovna, is also its deepest mystery. 8 Myskin never asks, and Rogozin never tells, why he committed the crime. Only Rogozin's "adroit
and eloquent" lawyer comes up with an explanation: "He proved
clearly and logically that the crime was a consequence of brain fever,
which had set in long before the crime was committed, as a consequence of the great distress of the accused" (507; 629). This rational
explanation, while obviously accepted by the jury, explains, in fact,
nothing; it just disguises dark passion as a pathological nature event.
The results of impulsive acting in The Idiot are disastrous. If we
look at the final state of the four protagonists, we are remided of the
fate of the heroes of Greek tragedy: Nastasja Filipovna murdered,
Myskin in the darkness of terminal idiocy, Rogozin in a Siberian
"house of the dead," Aglaja married to an impostor and swindler.
The tragedy of Dostoevsky's heroes is a tragedy of those who lose
control over their acting and, consequently, over their destiny.

2. Little Dorrit: Apart from the Rough World
In the novel Little Dorrit (1857), Charles Dickens constructed a
fictional world where the persons' capacity for intentional and purposeful acting is severly impaired. Two global conditions are responsible: rigid social organization and a propensity for accidents. Dickens' narrative is propelled by the agents' striving to cope with the
oppressive conditions reigning in the world into which they have
been thrown.
2.1.
Social powers. Society (written with a capital S) in Little
Dorrit is a hierarchy of roles, a predetermined network of social positions in which some inhabitants of the world are assigned a place.9
Those who are not given any role are outside society, even though
they are individualized as fictional persons (the Plornishes, for instance). Two allied institutions, one political, the state, the other fi-

81

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

nancial, the Bank, are the principal role givers. The major rearrangement within the agential constellation that occurs between parts I
and 2 does not affect the hierarchy of the social and subsocial.
The political institution achieves absurd perfection in that remarkable Dickensian construct, the Circumlocution Office. 10 The
office is "effectual" precisely because it is committed to the principle
of "how not to do it" (in the sense of "how to avoid doing anything
whatever"). One of its "managers" explains to a discontented subject
its true purpose: "It's like a limited game of cricket. A field of outsiders are always going in to bowl at the Public Service, and we block
the balls" (804). In this "infinitely complex bureaucracy" (Miller
1965, 234), all intentional activity ceases. Vis-a-vis the alien, impenetrable institution, a person is, in Mr. Meagles' words, "a man with no
rights ... a mere outlaw" (161). While this aspect associates the Circumlocution Office with court or prison (see Reid 1967, 28), its
mechanistic operation makes it similar to nature force. The analogy
is not lost on the rational agent, the inventor Doyce: "As I know what
such a metal will do at such a temperature, and such a body under
such a pressure, so I may know (if I will only consider), how these
great lords and gentlemen will certainly deal with such a matter as
mine" (145). In a world where ultimate decisions about the fate of
persons are made by specialists in nondoing, all activity is hampered,
and creative activity becomes impossible. 11
In contrast to the tightly knit clan that runs the Circumlocution
Office, the institution of financial power is embodied in one person
only, Mr. Merdle. Fully identified with its head, the Bank is an "immature" institution, operating in an arbitrary and conspiratorial
manner. It is just a name, a fac;:ade behind which the financier pursues
his personal ambitions. The fate of the Bank, its rise and fall, necessarily follows the fate of the man, first a "lucky winner in the lottery
oflife" (Thurley 1976, 251), then a catastrophic loser.
The social domain of Dickens' fictional world is epitomized in
that most crippling of institutions, the prison, especially the debtors'
prison of the Marshalsea. But the opposition freedom/incarceration
does not cancel the world's social hierarchy. 12 The Marshalsea yard is

Multiperson Worlds
divided into the "aristocratic or Pump side" and the "Poor side"
(264). John Chivery, the son of a free man, believes that the family of
the prisoner Dorrit is "far above" his own, the turnkey's (261). Expressing the same belief, Fanny claims (in a conversation with Mrs.
Merdle) that her father's position is "eminently superior ... even in
the Society in which he now moved" (287). This position is due to his
status as "gentleman," a set of inborn properties the imprisoned
William Dorrit possesses and his free brother Frederick lacks (264,
270). But when a sensitive person like Clennam finds himself in
prison, he succumbs to its devastating effect: "Imprisonment began
to tell upon him. He knew that he idled and moped" (803).
2.2.
Justification of the World Order. The social structure of
Dickens' fictional world is made understandable and is justified by
social representations. Dickens constructs three mutually reinforcing
systems: rules of social hierarchy, conventions of propriety, and dogmas of religion. Social representations are invariably propounded and
propagated by female characters. Thus, a remarkable division oflabor
by gender obtains in Dickens' fictional world: men pursue social acting, while women reveal its principles and formulate arguments in
its defense.
, Mrs. Merdle is the arbiter in matters pertaining to social status
and relations. Acknowledging that Society is an "artificial system,"
she nevertheless asserts that its hierarchy is given; the chasm between
the privileged and the deprived could be removed only by a complete
restructuring of the world, possible only in "a Millenium."13 Mrs.
General is the authority on proper comportment, speech, and mores
(see Frye 1968, 61). Having no opinions of her own, she is an ideal
speaker and promoter of social conventions. The essence of propriety
is the deletion of anything unpleasant, disturbing, disruptive: "Mrs.
General was not to be told of anything shocking. Accidents, miseries,
and offences, were never to be mentioned before her. Passion was to
go to sleep in the presence of Mrs. General, and blood was to change
to milk and water." When the world is purged of these defects, the
task of propriety is "to varnish'' the rest (503). The third system of social representations, Mrs. Clennam's religious dogma, has an inter-

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

textual source; it is derived from the Book (224). Demanding a severe
punishment for all "sinners," this "Calvinistic religion" (Leavis 1970,
231) sweeps the world clean of any enjoyment. Appropriately, Mrs.
Clennam, incapacitated in her thinking by a rigid dogma and in
body by paralysis, thinks of herself as being "in prison and in bonds"
(89).
The "pilots" of a merciless religion crown the set of social restrictions under which the inhabitants of the fictional world have to labor. This oppressive atmosphere seems to justify Miller's claim that
Little Dorrit is "Dickens' darkest novel" (1965, 227). Miller, however,
does not notice a tension within the world, created by a few fictional
persons who actively oppose the social order and its semiotic justification. Fanny's temperament and passion put her on a collision
course with Society: she is "an Angry Young Woman, in revolt against
her life and circumstances" (Reid 1967, 39). But she decides rationally
to fight the system from within. Her personal dislike of Mrs. Merdle
and Mrs. General is the emotional consequence of an ideological opposition, of her rejection of the social representations these women
embody and propagate. The principal opponent, Miss Wade, collides
with Society not so much because she has an "unhappy temper" (734)
but because she is sensitive to hypocrisy. She perceives that Society relieves its guilt when it calls "swollen patronage and selfishness ...
kindness, protection, benevolence and other fine names" (734). In
contrast to the norms of propriety, the "self-tormentor" holds unorthodox personal beliefs and pursues an alternative lifestyle. Finally, let us not forget Mistress Affery: her passionate outburst at
the end of the story compensates for a life of passive submission: "I
have broken out now, and I can't go back. I am determined to do it.
I will do it, I will, I will, I will!" (835). Mistress Affery's courageous
deed and Pancks's attack on his "proprietor" Casby demonstrate the
potential for rebellion inherent in the oppressive world. 14
2.3. Accident-prone world. The constrictions imposed on personal acting by social organization are, paradoxically, compounded
by the high frequency of accidents. Most critics dismiss this narrative
practice without recognizing its semantic energy: the high occurrence

Multiperson Worlds
of accidents contributes substantially to the weakening of intentionality in Dickens' world. 15 In an accident-prone world anything unexpected might happen, and anything expected might not occur, despite all personal efforts. In a penetrating imaging digression, the
ironic observer of life, Miss Wade, perceives that randomness is a
means of fatal necessity:
In the course through life we shall meet the people who are coming to meet us, from many strange places and by many strange
roads ... and what it is set to us to do to them, and what it is set
to them to do to us, will all be done .... You may be sure that
there are men and women already on their road, who have their
business to do with you, and who will do it.... They may be coming hundreds, thousands, of miles over the sea there; they may be
close at hand now; they may be coming, for anything you know,
or anything you can do to prevent it, from the vilest sweepings of
this very town. (63-64)
Miss Wade singles out the model case of interactional accident-fortuitous encounter (see Frye 1968, 52). Its redundancy, best documented by Cavaletto's meeting of Rigaud in a seedy inn in
Chalons-sur-Saone (bk.1, chap.II), is proof that it is needed not for
emplotment but for the construction of an accident-prone world.
It is through accidental encounters that most persons enter the
agential constellation. The device is "laid bare" at the very beginning
of the novel. The Marseilles prison cell brings together Rigaud/
Blandois and Cavaletto, who will become involved in the story when
they unexpectedly turn up in England. At the same time, but in another part of the French port, persons randomly assembled for a temporary stay in quarantine, Arthur Clennam, the Meagles family, and
Miss Wade, will become prominent members of the constellation. 16
The device works consistently and in gradual steps, until, to use
Dickens' words from his introduction to the 1857 edition, "the pattern is finished." 17 It is then perfecly within the order of such a world
that Clennam meets Cavaletto by happening to be at the street corner where the Italian is hit by a post carriage (bk.1, chap.13); that he
first sees Rigaud when, in a busy London street, he catches sight of

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

Tattycoram and the Frenchman walking together (bk.2, chap.9); and
that he is coming to his mother's house exactly at the moment when
Rigaud is knocking (bk.2, chap.IO). Reversals of fortune, such as the
Dorrits' impoverishment, then wealth, then poverty again, are yet an~
other product of the fictional world's randomness. The well-known
network of mysteries in Little Dorrit is a by-product of the random
order of its world. 18 The pivotal secret that is at the same time the
prime mover of the story is the entanglement of the Clennam and
the Dorrit families. It is closeted in the Clennams' "grim" family
home, which, for Arthur, is the very symbol of mysteriousness (596).
Under the dual restriction of rigid social organization and accidental randomness, the acting persons are deprived not only of intentionality but also of responsibility for their acting. Persons are not
responsible for their life histories, because they are victims of supraindividual social forces and uncontrollable incursions of random
events. In its general order Dickens' fictional world transcends by far
the material of social history that went into its making and reaches
out to modernism.
2.4. The story of tender hearts. We know that rebels exist in the
fictional world of Little Dorrit (III.3-1). But is is the "tender hearts"
who represent the strongest opposition to the order of this world. 19
Their opposition is motivated not by ideology or personal injury but
by their innermost character, particularly their emotionality. Tender
hearts are "good-natured' in the sense of having been given, having
been born, with compassion and the ability for self-sacrifice. 20 As
they observe and act in the '!rough'' world, these inborn traits crystallize. Amy Dorrit, the "child of the Marshalsea" and witness of its
many sufferings, acquires "a pitiful and plaintive look," while her
brother, witnessing the same conditions, becomes a pure egotist. 21
The sensitive Amy often escapes into solitude, dreaming of a different world, of home and simple happiness (216-17). The main
dreamer of the novel is, however, Arthur. Locked in the social role of
businessman, he imagines alternative courses of his life history "that
might have been better directed and happier to speculate upon'' (80).
Again, as in the case of Amy, he is a tender heart because of his "na86

Multiperson Worlds
ture" and despite the circumstances of his upbringing: "Bred in
meanness and hard dealing, this had rescued him to be man of honourable mind and open hand. Bred in coldness and severity, this had
rescued him to have a warm and sympathetic heart" (206). Clennam's
inborn gentleness makes him "the most disinterested doer of good"
(although in his dealing with Little Dorrit he is originally motivated
by "the vague idea of making amends for an old wrong") (House
1942, III).
Amy, unlike her sister Fanny, does not rebel; she does not have to.
She is "apart from the rough world," outside its hierarchy, impregnable to its social representations. Being exempt from the world, she
is above it and thus, paradoxically, dominates it. Physically weak and
socially powerless, she gives strength to others by a different power,
the power of her compassion (see Miller 1965, 246). Little Dorrit is
no "idiot," but she does not formulate her alternative to the reigning
social representations; she simply ignores them. 22 Exposed to Mrs.
General's teachings and her father's pressure to adopt the principles of
propriety, Amy, feeling "a faint misgiving" (530), remains her own
sel£ She does not need explicit principles of conduct, she spontaneously practices acts of kindness.
Because the tender hearts are exempt from the general order of the
fictional world, their life history is not formed by the restrictions of
social hierarchy, institutional power, fixed social roles, and accidental
randomness. On the contrary, the more adverse the external circumstances, the more beneficial they are for their emotional bonding.
Prison is the most propitious setting. Amy falls in love with Clennam
while living in the Marshalsea and working in his mother's houseprison. She is separated from him when she leaves the incarceration
and departs into the open world. While a free man, Clennam falls in
love with the beautiful but egocentric Minnie Meagles. Only when
he is committed to the Marshalsea does he discover Little Dorrit's importance for his life: "Looking back upon his own poor story, she was
its vanishing-point. Every thing in its perspective led to her innocent
figure" (801). Naturally, Amy rushes to Clennam's rescue the moment
she returns from her travels. But the asymmetry of their conditions

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

overrides the benefit of the prison. Now it is Clennam's turn for selfsacrifice, because a tender heart cannot carry another one down to
disgrace (829). 23 Only when Amy loses her wealth and Clennam regains his honor can the story of tender hearts be brought to its inevitable happy end.
Voiding the order of the ugly world, the story of the tender hearts
is composed in an aesthetic pattern-symmetry. Clennam returns
from foreign lands to discover Amy in the darkest corner of his
mother's gloomy house. When Amy returns from her travels, she
finds Arthur confined in what had been her father's Marshalsea cell.
Throughout part 1, Clennam supports Amy by his sympathy and
kindness; in part 2, Amy's love becomes Clennam's sole support. At
the end of part 1, Amy is carried out of her prison room by Clennam;
at the end of part 2, Clennam is taken from his prison cell by Amy.
Following each other like parallel melodies, the life histories of tender hearts merge in the harmony of the final chord. Never mind that
"the noisy and the eager, and the arrogant and the forward and the
vain, fretted and chafed" continue making "their usual uproar" (895).
The logic of the story of tender hearts ensures that the unchangeable
cruel world will be no more than the background for the happiness
of their "inseparable and blessed" union.

3. Milan Kundera: Erotics and Politics
Erotics and politics are the most popular activities of our time. In
one essential aspect they are direct opposites: politics is the most public, erotics the most private, activity. But this opposition is overshadowed by the many similarities and analogies displayed by the political and the erotic culture of the twentieth century.
Milan Kundera's stories and novels are a series of variations on the
theme of politics and erotics. 24 In a key passage from The Book of
Laughter and Forgetting, Kundera poses the questions of why the mature Beethoven "committed his most beautiful meditations" to the
form of variations. At first sight, variations might appear as "the most
superficial of forms ... a work suited for a lacemaker rather than a
88

Multiperson Worlds
Beethoven." But when the son-writer deciphers the unfinished gesture of his dying father-musicologist, he begins to understand that
the form of variations is a voyage "into the infinite internal variety
which is hidden in every thing." Now Kundera is able to defend his
"novel in the form of variations" and, by implication, his entire oeuvre: the particular narratives "follow each other like individual
stretches of a journey that leads into the interior of a theme, a
thought, a single situation whose comprehension is out of my sight"
(175, 165). 25
3.1. The order of power. Kundera's fictional world, in which the
variations of his story are generated, is characterized by three features:
a. The cement of Kundera's fictional universe is power. Both the
social activity of politics and the personal interaction of erotics
are power games. In the asymmetry of the rulers (power holders) and
the ruled (subordinates), grand historical, as well as trite private,
tragedies, are played out. It seems, however, that power in Kunderian
politics is exercised differently than in erotics: the basic power technique of politics is repression, that of erotics, coercion. Political repression paralyzes social activity and, ultimately, makes it irrelevant.
But, paradoxically, coercion stimulates erotic activity; when managed
by a powerful erotic master, Kundera's fictional world, like that of de
Sade, becomes "erotic paradise."
b. To acquire and preserve power, Kundera's agents mobilize all
motivational factors of acting. Kundera's politician is impelled by the
drive for absolute social control, his "erotician" by the drive for complete possession. Intense emotions-love, hatred, enthusiasm, jealousy, envy-are involved in both activities, giving the political struggles and erotic conquests the aura of fatal passions. And, finally,
Kundera's power players are masters of practical reasoning: the politician gains, and holds onto, power by following "scientific" plans and
methods of governing; the erotician expands his dominion by cunning strategies of seduction. The motivational cluster of politics and
erotics monopolizes the mental life of Kundera's fictional persons.
c. Kundera constructs both the political and the erotic activity as

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

a series of highly dramatic events-revolutions, military occupations,
erotic triumphs and humiliations. These orgasmic events follow a
sort of "volcanic" script: the brief, violent eruptions occur in a longlasting situation of banality. Since every orgasmic event erases all
traces of the preceding one, politics and erotics are activities without
continuity. They have no past, they also have no future or, better yet,
their future is self-destruction. The teleology of politics proceeds toward a silly utopia where history will end. Erotics struggles against
the inevitable process of aging, only to succumb to the ultimate disabler-death. Cut off from the past by forgetting and from the future
by lack of purpose, Kunderian politics and erotics are no more than
repetitive "stereotyped gestures" [stereotypni'. posunciny] with no evolution, no transcendent sense, no redemption.
The social base of Kundera's fictional universe is the postwar history of Bohemia or, more precisely, of the Czechs inside and outside
Bohemia. Yet to claim that Kundera's short stories and novels are reports on the public and private lives of the Czechs in the postwar era
is to be guilty of the same mimetic naYvete as when claiming that
Prague is a kafkaesque city. Kundera's universe is a set of possible
worlds in which the creator experiments with his theme and explores
its plasticity. The prime modulator of the therrie is the fluctuating intensity of social (political) control. In this sense, but only in this
sense, Kundera's erotics is a product of politics. The variations themselves arise from the dynamic potential of the motivational cluster,
from hierarchical rearrangements of its factors. Three "notebooks" of
short stories, Laughable Loves (1965, 1967, 1968), and a novel, The
Book ofLaughter and Forgetting (1978), together provide an anthology
of the variations on the Kunderian theme. 26
3.2. Laughable Loves. The fictional worlds of the collection (with
the exception of the last story, which I later treat separately) are
shaped by a confrontation between politics and erotics. The confrontation is necessary because of the totalizing claims of politics:
nothing is exempt from its governance, personal acting is fully subordinated to social activity. A person is just a patient in the workings

90

Multiperson Worlds
of the collective machinery. Edward (in "Edward and God") classifies
his vocation of teacher as "non-serious," not because of its character
but because it was chosen for him: "It was chosen by social demand,
political evaluations, the high school certificate, the entrance examination. The interlocking machinery of all these forces eventually
dumped him (as a crane dumps a sack onto a truck) from high school
into teachers' college" (IJ8; 206). In these conditions, the only "serious" personal pursuits are those that are "non-obligatory," first among
them, erotics. To be sure, an erotic activist (Klima in "Nobody Will
Laugh") finds himself under constant public scrutiny and "official"
criticism-by doorkeepers, neighborhood committees, superiors.
Nevertheless, within the world of rigid social control Kundera constructs a small space of privacy where hectic erotic activity is practiced.
It seems paradoxical at first sight that in the world of absolute collectivization a renaissance oflibertinism occurs.27 In fact, the order of
Kundera's fictional universe leads with perfect logic to the coexistence
of political collectivism and erotic anarchism. First, erotics is pursued
with maximal intensity and vigor because it is the only expression of
the individual's freedom of action in the world of "iron" social laws.
So much has been recognized by the philosophizing libertine Doctor
Havel and repeated after him by Kundera's interpreters. I propose,
however, that a more powerful, hidden logic creates this seemingly
paradoxical confluence: despite their confrontation, totalitarian politics and libertine erotics have the same motivational and actional
structure. Libertinage is erotics conducted by means of totalitarian
politics; it is a drive for sexual conquest, but it follows chillingly rational scripts and methods. The powerless of the public sphere becomes the ruler in the private domain. Martin ("The Golden Apple
of Eternal Desire") adopts for erotics not only the rules but even the
terminology of totalitarian operations. Like a secret agent following
an instruction book, he dutifully performs "registration," "contacting," "arresting," except that his targets are not political opponents
but women. Doctor Havel's erotic activity is conducted quite differently, with sophisticated philosophical arguments and impeccable elegance, but, essentially, it is the same rational power game as Mar91

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

tin's. This preacher of individual freedom builds his erotic kingdom
on dictatorial powers, arbitrarily selecting or rejecting prospective
"subjects." No sophistry is spared to ensure success in seduction. Edward (in "Edward and God") seduces Alice by pretending religious
fervor and then terminates the relationship by turning her own ideology against her. The chief physician's mistress convinces Doctor
Havel to make love to her by an argument that could serve as a
school example of demagoguery: "You are the only person with
whom I can afford to be unfaithful to the chief physician. You really
do like him and could never hurt him" (133; 159).
Kundera's fictional world of massive victimization is an ideal place
for the power holders. For political rulers, it is a realm over which
they exercise unchecked, arbitrary governance; for the libertines, it is
a hunting ground full of attractive deer and with no seasonal restrictions. In the world ruled by the conspiracy of oppressive politics and
coercive erotics there is no place for private emotions. In this variant
of Kundera's theme, private emotion is erased from the motivational
cluster of political and erotic acting. Political passions substitute for
private emotions to the point that even the victims perceive the
emptiness of their supervisors' life ("Edward and God"). For libertine
erotics, love is a hindrance. In the story "The Hitchhiking Game,"
the nameless girl accepts complete submission, gets rid of her deeply
ingrained prudery, and thus becomes a perfect sexual object. The
payoff of the game is the loss of unity of body and soul: the lovers
crossed a boundary behind which is lovemaking with a most intense
sexual pleasure but "without emotion and without love" (88; 25).
Erotics without love becomes erotics of"loves," of repetitious copulations. Doctor Havel, the cynical and, therefore, sincere philosopher of erotics, discovers nothing but banality at the core of contemporary libertinism: "The era of Don Juans has come to an end.
Today's descendant of Don Juan no longer conquers, but only collects.
. . . Erotics which used to be the lime-twig of catastrophes became
similar, thanks to him, to breakfasts and dinners, to philately and
ping-pong, or even to a street-care ride and shopping" (120-21;
140-141). Erotics without emotion turned the most intense private
92

Multiperson Worlds
experience into banal bodily exercises, just as totalitarian politics
turned social life into empty public rituals. The atmosphere of this
erotic paradise is polluted by futility, frustration, cynicism. Its highest ruler is death, literally and figuratively, death that randomly takes
anybody.
Kundera's masterstroke in Laughable Loves is that he not only constructs but also deconstructs his erotic paradise. In the last story of
the collection, "Dr. Havel after Ten Years," erotics is fully liberated
from politics and emerges from its modest niche into the grand
world. But, paradoxically, this liberation creates a parodistic variation
of the theme: the story of erotics without politics is just a rewriting of
trite romance. We are in a cliche world of international spas, glamorous movie stars, aging playboys, diligent disciples, rejected maidens, tall women who look like horses. The place could be Karlovy
Vary or Kislovodsk, Baden Baden or Vichy; the time could be the
belle epoque or late capitalism or goulash socialism. Deprived of its
basic semantic tension, it is an impotent fictional world incapable of
generating a story. Just as the collector of women becomes "a collector of words," so the authenticity of experience is replaced by the arbitrariness of signs. When politics is deleted from the theme, Kundera's narrative becomes just a token of a perennially circulating
schema.
3.3. The Book ofLaughter and Forgetting. In The Book ofLaughter and Forgetting, politics and erotics are structurally more balanced
than in Laughable Loves. There, politics is a background for the praxis
of erotics; here, politics is a domain of the fictional world structure,
its story told in short, dry narratives of the orgasmic events in the
modern history of Bohemia. The more balanced semantic structure
of the novel is an auspicious space for the theme-and-variations
method. The variations, generated by different political conditions,
historical periods, and geographies, create a chain of sharp reversals
and troubling juxtapositions .
In the "political age" of the 1950s, erotics is fully controlled by politics; it becomes a slot in a paratactic chain of political actions:
"[Mirek] tells her [Zdena], how he rebelled against his reactionary fa93

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

ther, she rails against intellectuals, they have calluses on their backsides and hold hands. They go to meetings, denounce their fellow citizens, lie and make love" (27; 21). All this hectic "revolutionary" activity is, however, no more than the enactment of a script written by
the supremely ruling kitsch. Following this script is fatal for acting:
both public and private acts become pretensions. Zdena sheds prescribed tears at the news that some Russian statesman has died.
When she accuses Mirek of "copulating like an intellectual," he puts
on a show of "unbridled passion": "He moved on her with feigned
frenzy, making a long snarling noise like a dog makes when he struggles with his master's slippers" (19; 13).
No wonder the feigned enthusiasm could not last. With the dawning of the "criti~ age'' of the 1960s, the Kunderian theme produces a
new variation: the revolutionary script is replaced by its opposite,
called "the stalking of the lost deed." The revolution is betrayed by its
original makers, just as in the political age it had betrayed its devoted
servants. Only Zdena, in a perverse and ineffectual revenge on the
traitor Mirek, remains faithful during the age of criticism and beyond. She welcomes the Russian tanks that "have come to punish all
the infidels" (22; 16). But the presence of a foreign power creates radically new conditions for public and private acting in Kunderas fictional
world. Zdena, in staying faithful, becomes a traitor, Mirek's infidelity
proves to be faithfulness.
The fictional world of part 2 ("Mother") is a recurrence of the
world without politics, which we already know from the last story of
Laughable Loves. It is also a more complex variation of the game of
libertinism: a woman joins a man to turn the game into "little orgies." The recasting only confirms the death of emotion in this kind
of erotic activity; the libertines calculate coolly plans and tricks of seduction and turn lovemaking into anonymous sexual athletics: "It
was a masquerade party. Karel had put a Nora mask on Eva and a little-boy mask on himself; Marketa took his head off his body. It was a
headless male body'' (rn 48).
Pushed out of the fictional world of part 2, politics returns with a
vengeance in parts 4 and 6, devoted to Tamina, the central figure of
94

Multiperson Worlds
the novel. In the fictional world of brutal oppression resting on foreign power (we glimpsed it already in part 1 of The Book), politics becomes a purely destructive, alien force. It can no longer serve as a catalyst of Kundera's theme. Necessarily, the variation that gels in the
conditions of this world (the first segment ofTamina's story) is a narrative of absolute loss: loss of a brief political freedom, of the home
country, oflove, and, finally, of the last traces of the happy past-private letters and diaries. Erotics returns in the second segment ofTamina's story, but in an entirely novel fictional world: a fairy-tale land of
children, an island outside history and geography. It seems that, at
last, paradise has been regained in the natural spontaneity of children's erotic games. Tamina, having forgotten the past, finds momentary freedom in the "simple joy" of spontaneous sexuality. But
the existence of primordial paradise is fragile. The tape recorder and
the "idiocy of guitars" invade the island, and the children begin imitating the lewd dance of the adults. At that moment, when "sensuality loses its meaning, innocence loses its meaning" (198; 188), Tamina
flees into her final exile.
In the concluding part of The Book of Laughter and Forgetting,
Kundera composes the last variation, putting his theme to test in a
fictional world located in the advanced civilization and political freedom of the West. This space has been a prohibited paradise for the
Czech, but now, exiled, he finds a world similar to the spa of the last
story of Laughable Loves. In a world with no tension between the
public and the private domains; politics and erotics become banal activities. The alien listens with amusement to discussions about such
"political" issues as "with or without brassiere?" He witnesses the insipid erotic activity of mass libertinism in the "real" orgies, staged and
firmly managed by a gracious hostess. The seasoned libertine reacts to
the regimented erotics with derisive laughter and is rightfully evicted.

95

I

CHAPTER IV

(T)

Interaction and Power

If a person exists in the solitude of the one-person world, either his or
her acting is a response to events in the natural environment or it
originates in his or her own mind. While the "story of the mind" is
fascinating, the elemental dynamic (as I have called the exchange between the person and the nature force) has a restricted narrative potential. The vast majority of stories, even if they incorporate the elemental dynamic, are generated in multiperson worlds.

r. Interaction
The conditions of acting in the multiperson world are radically
different. Each person is integrated in a network of interpersonal relationships, so that "the Self exists only in dynamic relation with the
Other" (Macmurray 1961, 17). The person preserves the ability to
form subjective intentions, activate idiosyncratic motivations, aim at
his or her own goals, and pursue acting in a characteristic mode. But
in the interpersonal network, an individual's intentions and actions
necessarily meet, clash with, the coagents' intentionality. Acting turns
into interacting. Social groups impose additional restrictions on the
person's intentionality, since they "appear to acquire goals and pur-

Interaction and Power
poses of 'their own,' independent of those of the individuals comprising them" (Rapoport 1974, 133). As a result, the inhabitant of the
multiperson world has to pursue acting in conditions that from his or
her perspective are complex, indeterminate, and ultimately uncontrollable.1 However, the world that looks chaotic to the acting person
is the most fertile narrative world. Content analysis has calculated
that "on a single page of the text of a short story or novel there will
typically appear from two to six personal interactions" (Lasswell,
Lerner, and de Sola Pool 1952, 79). The semantics of narrative is, at its
core, the semantics of interaction.
It is difficult enough to understand theoretically the concept of action (chap. II above). The difficulty increases enormously as we proceed to the theory of interaction. To make matters worse, analytic
philosophy, which was so helpful for understanding acting, offers little guidance in conceptualizing interaction. With a few exceptions
(Porn 1977; von Wright 1983), it has given hardly any thought to it.
Even when reflecting on freedom of acting, Davidson manages to
push out of sight the social constraints imposed on agents (1980,
64). 2 In order to build a theory of interacting in fictional worlds, narrative semantics has to tap other sources of inspiration-social psychology, sociology, cultural semiotics, and so on.
1.1.
Agential constellation. Not all persons coexisting in a multiperson world establish interactional contact. Those who do form the
agential constellation; it ranges in size from two to dozens of persons.
But it is the structural factors that are decisive in the forma,tion of the
fictional agents' constellation. First, the group is arranged hierarchically: protagonists (principal agents), secondary characters, and background characters are distinguished by the different degrees of their
participation in the story. The theoretical significance of this concept
is not diminished by the fact that some narratives, both ancient and
modern, comprise two or more agential constellations in various
kinds of linking.3 Second, the group is arranged in compositional
patterns, such as symmetry, parallelism, contrast, and so on (Ill.I: the
double triangle of the protagonists of The Idiot; 111.2.4: the (a)symmetry of the Amy-Clennam relationship). 4 As the interaction pro~
97

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

ceeds, the group is subject to modifications and transformations both
in size and in structure. The agential constellation is not only a precondition of interacting but also its scope (space).
1.2. Interaction and communication. The elementary form of
interacting is direct physical contact. If two persons, alternating in
the roles of agent and patient, affect each other with the same transitive act (shaking hands, punching), the interaction is symmetrical.
Asymmetrical interaction occurs if the persons perform different acts
(slapping/turning the other cheek) or if one of them responds with
an omission (extending hand/withholding hand). There is no direct
contact in the mental domain; exchange of mental acts is mediated
by signs in communication.
Communication is an exchange of semiotic acts and, like physical
interaction, is reciprocal and can be either symmetrical or asymmetrical. Indeed, communication can be used as a general model of interaction; significant insights into interaction have been gained by
studying the conditions, functions, and varieties of communication.
Thus, for example, Eco's table representing "all possible understandings and misunderstandings" in communication (1976, 18-19) stimulates a typology of "successful" and "failed" interactions. But for the
purposes of fictional semantics, it is advisable to advance from analogy to integration, to view communication as part and parcel of interaction (Dold.el 1977; see also Rehbein 1977, 314-15; Genot 1984,
45; Levelt 1989, 29). The persons communicate in interacting; their
speech acts are determined or, at least, influenced, by their actional
engagement. The integration of communication into interaction has
been most clearly recognized in sociolinguistic studies of conversation (see van Dijk 1985, vol. 3; Grimshaw 1990) and in Wierzbicka's
"cross-cultural pragmatics" (1991, 453). Fictional semantics follows
this path by recognizing that the fictional world is the space of a twin
exchange-of physical actions and of semiotic acts. In other words,
the stories in multiperson worlds are propelled as much by communication between fictional persons as by their physical interaction. 5
Communication is usually understood as a rational activity: the
speakers respect the rules of conversation, such as tum-taking or

Interaction and Power

Gricean maxims, plan on the micro- and macrolevels, monitor their
performance, correct errors, and so on (see Levelt 1989). But this is a
highly idealized view of communication, to say the least. Just as persons do not always act rationally, so they do not always communicate
rationally. Communication can be impulsive, irrational, akratic, or
mixed, corresponding to the action modes the persons carry out in
their interaction (III.1.4: insults, threats, curses in the Dostoevskian
scandal).
Communication makes use of all available semiotic systems (media). Language is, no doubt, its principal medium, and the dialogue
(a face-to-face exchange of oral speech acts) its most rudimentary
form (see Bachtin [1929] 1984, 251-66; Mukafovsky 1948, 1:129-53).
But today we know that the significance of nonverbal communication cannot be underestimated. A minor gesture or posture is often
the sign of a strong mental agitation (II.5.3). Similarly, silence and
negative semiotic acts are communicative omissions (II-4-2) expressive of hidden mental events, especially emotions (Todorov 1971, 101;
see also Portch 1985, 14-15; van den Heuvel 1985, 79-80).
The most intimate connection, indeed, fusion, between action
and communication is achieved in performative speech acts. In these
acts "words do things," to paraphrase the title of Austin's classic book
on the' subject (1962). We tackle performatives in more detail later,
when investigating their role in fictional-world construction (VI.1).
Here, let me point to their role within the fictional world, in the constructed interaction. Performatives are significant factors of the
world's dynamic. When an appropriate source pronounces a performative, the state of the addressee is altered: he or she becomes appointed, promoted, dismissed, married, arrested, sentenced, declared
insane, and so on. Needless to say, these changes affect in many ways
and to different degrees the life histories of fictional persons (see
Vll.2; Ep.3.2).
1.3. lnteractional accidents. Due to the diversity of the interacting persons' intentions, the potential for actional failures grows proportionately with the size of the agential constellation. More significantly, if the intentions of the interacting persons are contrary, one
99

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

agent's success is another's failure. We have already alluded to these
phenomena when we spoke about the essential indeterminacy of interaction (IV.I.I). In these conditions, definition and recognition of
accidents is difficult. We adopt the concept of accident from the oneperson world (ll.3.2), where it was defined as intentional acting leading to an unintended end state. In the multiperson world an accident
happens when interaction leads to a state that none of the agents involved had anticipated as his or her intended state (III.2.3: Cavaletto
meeting Rigaud in Chalons-sur Saone). We should bear in mind that
the valuation of the accident accords with the general relativity of interactional effects: what is a lucky accident for one person may be unlucky for another.
The characteristics of the multiperson world are responsible for a
significant difference between actional and interactional accidents.
Accidents in the one-person world affect only the acting person and
no one else. Accidents in multiperson worlds happen to persons engaged in interacting (X injures his knee playing tennis with Y), but,
quite often, they affect "outsiders," persons not participating in the
accident-causing action (X driving a car hits pedestrian Y) or interaction (Z is injured in cross fire between X and Y). In this case, the accident creates a link between the outsider and the acting persons and
usually expands the agential constellation. Not all persons involved in
the accident need be aware that it happened. A popular device of fictional narratives exemplifies this category: X and Y are engaged in a
conversation that is overheard by outsider Z; the accidentally acquired information is of fundamental import for Z's acting, but X
and Y are unaware of their interference in Z's life history-one more
proof of the weakening of intentionality brought into the world by
accidents.
2. Motivating Interaction

Interaction is motivated by all the mental factors that were specified in II. 5-drives, emotions, cognition. However, in the multiper-

IOO

Interaction and Power
son world, motivational systems are enhanced by two additional
components, absent in the one-person world: interpersonal relations
and social representations.
2.1. Interpersonal relations. Cognitive relations-the knowledge
and beliefs of each person about the other members of the agential
constellation-play a major role in the agents' decision making,
plans, and strategies. 6 Emotional relations, the diverse and changing
reciprocal or nonreciprocal emotional links between persons, claim
their place in the set of basic emotions (II.5-3): love/hatred, antipathy/empathy, spite/beneficence, envy/magnanimity, and so on. Their
motivational force is potent to the point that "certain types of actions
are characteristic of certain emotional relations" (Nissenbaum 1985,
126). Coupled often with drives, a few interpersonal passions, such as
love, hatred, and envy, dominate interaction in many fictional worlds
(III.I: The Idiot; IIl.3: Kundera's fictional world).
2.2. Social representations. The existence of groups and social
organization gives rise to collective consciousness. Its cognitive form
is socially based knowledge, variously labeled as collective representations (Durkheim), cultural codes (Barthes), semantic or semiotic environment (Rapoport), symbolic universes (Berger and Luckmann),
ontological systems (Pavel). Here, we adopt from social psychology
the term social representations (see Farr and Moscovici 1984) and
gather under this rubric such cognitive systems as language, cultural
archetypes, racial and ethnic beliefs, religious creeds, ideologies, and
scientific knowledge. The supraindividual cognitive environment is
"the most important determinant of the human condition" (Rapoport 1974, 51) and prime social mover of interaction (III.2.2: three
systems of social representations in the fictional world of Little Dorrit). Its effect is strengthened by attendant collective emotions, such
as national, political, or religious fervor, racial and ethnic hatred, and
so on (III.3-1: political passions in Kundera's fictional world; see also
Ep.3.2). Social representations and collective emotions are essential
for group cohesion, splitting the world into "us" and "them" and,
consequently, motivating interacting between groups (see Hamilton

IOI

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

· 1976, 83-84). They are transmitted from generation to generation in
socialization and thus ensure the existence and distinctiveness of the
group over time.
Social psychologists have studied the historical fate of social representations? and emphasized the cognitive "pluralism" of advance societies (see Berger and Luckmann 1969, u5-17). That means that at
least in principle a person has a selection of several versions of
Weltanschauung. Empirical studies provide evidence of a dialectic of
social representations and personal belief and uphold neither social
determinism nor extreme individualism. For instance, Jodelet comes
to the conclusion that mental imaging of the body stems from both
private sources (a person's bodily experience and his or her relationship to the environment) and social representations (knowledge gathered from social interaction and communal approaches to the body).
She proposes the terms "private body'' and "social body'' to designate
these two kinds of imaging (1984, 217-18). Milgram, in his study of
representations of the city, has come to the conclusion that personal
''mental maps" of a city are based on a "collective representation";
however, "through selection, emphasis and distortion the maps became projections of life styles, and express the emotional feelings of
the participants" (1984, 301, 299). The formation of a person's "cognitive picture of the world ... takes place in a social context; and, in
particular, the acquisition of language, without which developed
thinking is inconceivable, depends on interpersonal contact and
communication'' (Strawson 1992, 81).
The dialectic of social consciousness and private mind provides a
flexible model for understanding motivation in the multiperson
world: the pressure of the group enforces social factors, but they have
to be "internalized," appropriated by the individual mind, in order to
motivate the person's acting (see von Wright 1983). Moreover, the
pressure of social representations does not have an equal impact on
all persons; the effect depends on the character of the appropriating
mind (see Hirst and Woolley 1982, 24-28), typically descr~bed in such
dichotomies as "acquiescent" versus "independent" ("resistant") (Ver-

102

Interaction and Power
non 1969, 103), dogmatic (or manipulated) versus critical. 8 The individual's motivations are negotiated in a tension between the force of
collective factors and the intensity of his or her striving for motivational self-assertion.
2.3. Power. Interpersonal relations and social representations
correspond to the motivational systems of the one-person world. In
contrast, power has no such correlate; it is a motivational factor
emerging only in the multiperson world. 9 Even if we do not derive all
personal and social inequalities from power, we cannot fail to notice
its profound impact on the structuring of multiperson worlds and on
the conditions of interacting.

Power is a means whereby one person-the power holder-controls the intentions and acting of another-the subordinate. The introduction of power brings about a rearrangement of the agential
constellation, transforming it into an asymmetrical hierarchy. Depending on the source, three kinds of power can be distinguished.
Physical power, the elemental means of domination, derives from
bodily prowess and from weapons and imposes control by physical
acts. Mental power, originating in superior mental capacities (knowledge, skills, expertise, etc.) is applied through semiotic acts of information and persuasion. Social power is generated in organized
groups, especially in institutional forms of organization; it is associated with commanding positions in the political, military, or corporate hierarchy, with class privilege, wealth, and so on (VI.4). The
power relationship is a general motivational factor applicable to person-person, person-group, and group-group interaction.
The exercise of power is the praxis of the power holder in imposing and sustaining his or her domination over the subordinate person. Porn discerned two principal modes of power imposition, influencing and norm giving (1970, 68). The norm-giving power
transforms the narrative world into a modal world and is dealt with
in chapter V. In influencing, the power is exercised in and through
acting and communicating. If it emanates from a social group or institution, its impact on persons is similar to that of social representa-

103

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

tions, and so are their potential reactions. The pressure of social
power is universal, but different persons accept or reject the pressure
in different ways.
Power is exercised either by repression-the subordinate person is
prevented from performing intended actions-or by coercion-he or
she is forced to perform actions that are against his or her intentions
(see von Wright 1963b, 54; Porn 1977, 72-73). Coercion brings about
involuntary acting, repression involuntary nonacting. If repression
leads to the annihilation of the subordinate's actional capacity, we call
it disabling, following von Wright (1963b, 55). The opposite pressure,
coercion, might result in the formation or acquisition of a capacity
for acting (111.3: repressive and coercive power in Kundera's fictional
world).
2.4. Erotics. In the general survey of motivation, we took notice
of composite movers of acting, motivational clusters (Il.5.4). In the
multiperson world, the most representative motivational complex is
the erotic cluster. All the motivational factors of the multiperson
world-drives, emotional and cognitive relationships, social representations, power-are involved in erotic acting (for a similar view,
see Izard 1977, 175). The factor of sexual drive gives erotic activity the
character of a need, similar to hunger and thirst (see Bolles 1975, 175).
The emotional constituent-love-unites eros with the grand passions of the mind. The power factor in its "assertion of mastery'' over
the partner (Millett 1970, 249) links erotics to the activities of domination, especially politics. The cognitive constituent of the cluster introduces into erotic acting practical reasoning, plans, designs, and
strategies, often articulated in social scripts of courtship, bonding,
and so forth.IO Social representations restrict or stimulate erotic activity by rejecting or justifying it and by offering culturally based ideologies or philosophies of love. 11 Because of all these motivational
factors and links, erotics is the crux of interaction.
This feature could be sufficient to explain the popularity of erotic
stories in narrative fiction, but an additional circumstance should not
pass unnoticed: hierarchic shifts within the cluster make erotic acting
highly diversified and changeable. Love (in the sense of eros rather

Interaction and Power

than agape) "becomes so universal a theme because of the remarkable
variety of its worlds" (Bayley 1960, 5) (111.3: the variations of Kundera's theme). The shifts can be so radical as to make one of the cluster's factors the sole mover. If erotic activity is motivated exclusively
by the drive factor, it becomes sexual praxis. A special narrative genre,
sexual fiction, is devoted to constructing this more or less stereotyped
activity. 12 In contrast, the predominance of emotion (passion) in the
cluster leads to radical reversals in acting, for example, from impulsive outbursts to despairing passivity (see Ep.3.1). When power takes
over erotic activity, the tensions that characterize the relationship between the power holder and the subordinate come to the fore; 13 in
some fictional worlds, these tensions provide a strong stimulus for
erotic activity (111.3), while in others they cause serious disruptions.
Under the dominance of the cognitive factor, erotics is pursued with
cool calculation: choosing the optimal partner by a rationally determined preference, plotting strategies of seduction (Ill.3: Kundera's
Don Juans), and so on. Fictional narratives often foreground the factor of social representations, the implicit or explicit ideologies of eros.
This ideology profoundly influences the overall structure of the fictional world of love stories, creating the world of romantic love versus the world of perversion, the world of happiness and joy versus the
world of destructive "fatal attraction," the world of sacrifice versus
the world of egoism, and so on. Just as erotic activity is the representative form of interaction, so the fictional worlds of erotic stories are
the foci of the tensions characteristic of the multiperson world.
3. Modes oflnteraction

In the multiperson world the agents pursue their acting in the
same modes as they do in a one-person world, as rational, impulsive,
akratic, and irrational (II.6). If the interacting agents adopt one and
the same mode of acting, a homogeneous interactional mode ensues.
Thus, for example, chess players, models of rational acting, complement each other in the control of the game by adhering to the principles of practical reasoning; impulsive agents are locked in a feed105

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

back circuit of emotional escalation, gradually losing control over
their interaction (IIl.1.3: the mobile of the Dostoevskian scandal). If
the agents represent different actional modes, their interaction will be
of a mixed mode. A general typology of the mixed modes can easily
be set up in various permutations-a rational and an impulsive
agent, a rational and an irrational agent, and so on-but the specific
character of the ensuing mode depends on many subjective and intersubjective variables. There is a rich source of narrative dynamic
here, fully exploited in fiction.
Power is, perhaps, the strongest motivational factor in the multiperson world. Let us observe the interaction modes generated by its
impact by focusing on the simplest, two-agent constellation (person
X and person Y).
3-1. When neither X nor Y tries to bring the other under his or
her power, the persons act as independent agents; both are free to
pursue their respective intentions. Positive emotional ties, particularly love, friendship, comradeship, and partnership, lead free agents
to form a shared intention and pursue a common goal. The interaction is conducted in the mode of cooperation: pulling a bow saw,
singing a duet, writing a book together. The cooperating agents "are
so linked that any participant can attain his goal if, and only if, the
others with whom he is linked can attain their goals" (Deutsch 1973,
20). Cooperation plays a significant role in communication (Grice
1975) and is required in complex activities, where it encourages division oflabor and role specialization. It is the cradle of social acting
(see Rehbein 1977, 102-26; Ewin 1981, 5-18).
3.2. Person Y is under the power of person X; the subordinate
agent has to follow the power holder's intentions. In this asymmetrical constellation the mode of peremptory interaction is generated.
Whatever the specific arrangements, the subordinate agent is in the
service of the power holder. In rigid power structures, such as the
military, the subordinates are depersonalized (V.3.2); soldiers executing a person on the orders of a commander are his instruments. In
less rigid power structure, the subordinate agent preserves the status
of person, despite the restrictions imposed on his or her intentional106

Interaction and Power
ity. The "bitterness of dependence" 14 may develop into hostility toward the power holder, creating emotional tension in the constellation. The power holder is threatened by the subordinate agent's potential rebellion, and even when seemingly in full control, he or she
is not safe from revolutionary reversals of the hierarchy (III.2.2: the
rebellion of Mistress Affery).
3.3. Person X tries to bring person Y under his or her power by
interfering with X's intentions: a constellation of influencer-influencee obtains. If the influencee accepts the imposition of power, he
or she becomes a subordinate agent; the constellation and the mode
of action then follow the pattern outlined in IV.3.2. If, however, the
influencee reacts by protecting the status of independence and the
influencing agent persists in his or her attempts at domination, conflict is inevitable. 15 Influencing is the necessary precondition of conflict, yet emotional relations (disgust, repulsion, hatred) can be
strongly involved in its rise and sustenance.
Conflict is the most common mode of interacting, a fact recognized in the very first sentence of a classic book on the subject: "Conflict is an activity that is found almost everywhere" (Boulding 1962,
1). Boulding proceeds to enumerate the fields of enquiry that have to
deal with this mode of interaction: biology, economics, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, history, and even geography. He did not mention narratology, but we cannot fail to notice
that conflict is the most popular source of narrative dynamic. Narrative semantics studies the structures and varieties of conflict for its
own purposes; but since it has under its purview an immense number of fictional conflicts, it has a good change to enrich the general
theory.
The frequency of conflict-between persons, groups, states-has
led some psychologists to derive it from the aggression drive and thus
make it fatally inevitable (Vernon 1969, 59, 73). More realistically,
Deutsch recognized the positive functions of conflict in the formation and change of interpersonal relations and social structures (1973,
8-10; 1991, 27). The two faces of conflict have been reasserted, at least
in the sphere of personal relationships: "Conflict can be constructive,
107

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

helping to resolve differences and bring partners closer together, or
conflict can be destructive, ending in emotional abuse and/or physical violence" (Loyd and Emery 1994, 29). "Conflict encounters seem
capable of lowering people to their most base instincts, and, yet, out
of conflict we often derive our most productive achievements"
(Spitzberg, Canary, and Cupach 1994, 183).
Various taxonomies of conflict have been suggested. Deutsch's is a
sociopsychological typology derived from the divergence between an
"objective state of affairs" and the perceptions of conflicting parties
(1973, u-15). Rapoport has suggested other possible classification criteria: the nature of the participants (individuals, small groups, large
groups), the issues (rights or privileges, control over resources, political power), the means employed (from persuasive argument to physical annihilation). He himself develops a three-dimensional systemsbased typology: (r) endogenous/exogenous conflicts: presence or
absence of a higher system that might control or resolve the conflict
of the subsystems; (2) symmetric/asymmetric conflicts: in the first
case, "roughly similar," in the second case, "disparate" systems are involved; and (3) issue-oriented/structure-oriented conflicts: evolving
around a particular issue or around the existence of an entire system
(1974, 174-76). All these concepts should ultimately find their place
in narrative semantics. However, another taxonomy proposed by
Rapoport (1960; 1974, 180-82) and elaborated by Ogley (r99r)-the
differentiation of fights, games, and debates-seems to me especially
pertinent, since it is based on a criterion central to action theory. According to Rapoport, "the fight is dominated by affective components of conflict, the game, by rational ones, and the debate, by ideological ones" (1974, 182). Translated into our terminology, the three
kinds of conflict are due to diverse motivational factors. In fights, the
emotional motivation dominates, and the antagonists feel mutual
animosity or hatred. Games and debates (verbal conflicts) are dominated by cognitive motivation and are often governed by specific
rules; their participants act as rational opponents. The purpose of
the game is to win, the purpose of the debate is to convince the opponent.
ro8

Interaction and Power
Two additional kinds of conflict have to be incorporated into our
semantics because of their significant role in narrative worlds. Feud,
the dramatic mobile of many myths and epics (see Lord 1960, 190),
is a prolonged, "culturally transmitted" antagonism between families,
social and religious groups, or nationalities (Rapoport 1974, 1980).
Inner conflict is located in the mental domain of the acting person; it
arises from contradictory intentions, desires, goals, strategies, and so
forth. It manifests itself in the form of interior dialogue, a basic verbal expression of mental tension (see Cohn 1978, 90-92).
Conflict is a sequence of actions with three distinct stages:
a. Outbreak consists mainly of specific speech acts: demand,
promise, order, threat, and ultimatum (on the side of the influencer),
rejection, defiance, and counterthreat (on the part of the influencee).
In traditional narratives, the speech acts of the outbreak are ritualized
and often reinforced by boasting-a display of the opponent's prowess.
b. At the peak stage, conflict is pursued in three different ways.
Verbal conflict is an escalation of the outbreak stage, adding insult
and invective to the repertoire of the hostile speech acts. 16 Combat is
an exchange of transitive physical actions aimed at causing bodily
harm to the antagonist, usually by the use of special instrumentsweapons_l7 A model case of combat is the duel, a rule-governed and
supervised exchange of harm-causing acts. Contest, the third variety
of conflict, proceeds along parallel but interlocked strains of intransitive actions. The actions ofX do not directly affect Y (and the reverse
is also true), but the agents perform alternately a sequence of competitive actions and reactions with the aim of winning the contest.
Athletic competitions (Rapoport 1974, 179) provide the model case of
the contest structure.
c. The last stage of conflict, its resolution, offers two possibilities:
In accommodation, which results from power balance or negotiations, the influencer gives up his or her attempts, and the preconflict
constellation of two independent agents is reestablished. In victory/ defeat, one of the opponents succeeds in overpowering the antagonist and imposing his or her will. The victor might prove his or

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

her domination by punishing the conquered, up to and including his
or her annihilation.
Despite its often chaotic course, conflict is a structured interaction
arising in a set agential constellation, under specific motivational
pressures and following distinct stages. It is this feature that invites its
representation by logical models, especially those of the theory of
games (see Rapoport 1960; 1970; 1974, 131-50; 1995; Billing 1992). On
the other hand, conflict is an extremely diversified interaction, depending as it does on the personalities of the antagonists, their particular goals and relationships, and varying exterior circumstances. 18

It is the plasticity of the conflict that makes it a perennial feature of
fictional stories.

4. Social Acting
We stated at the outset of this chapter that in the multiperson
world, individuals are integrated not only into interpersonal relationships but also into social groups. The multiperson world is thus
transformed into a social world. Social scientists generally distinguish
small groups-family, kin, neighborhood, pub fellowship-and large
groups-professions, enterprises, tribes, nations. 19 It is commonly assumed that the conditions of acting in small groups are different
from those in large groups. According to Olson, in small groups the
"common good" can be pursued by voluntary contributions, whereas
in large groups some coercion or compulsion is necessary. Small
groups act by "informal coordination," whereas the acting of large
groups requires "formal organization'' (1971, 15-16, 33-34, 46).
The dichotomy of "informal coordination" and "formal organization'' is of great theoretical import but need not be tied to group size.
We should bear in mind that small groups, such as the family or clan,
can be rigidly organized in some cultures. On the other hand, large
groups can be unorganized and act in an "uncontrolled manner"-as
mobs or crowds (see Vernon 1969, 94). In our semantics, the dichotomy informal coordination/formal organization serves as a mo-

110

Interaction and Power
tivational factor of social acting. Informal coordination prevails in
communities, groups whose collective acting is "a function of individual actions" (Porn 1970, 79);20 its structure and modes correspond
to those defined for interaction between persons (IY.1-3). In contrast,
formal organization motivates social acting in institutions, which impose a number of supraindividual constraints: explicitly formulated
regulations, well-defined power hierarchy, charted division of labor,
specific role distribution, and, last but not least, reinforcing social
representations (legitimizing ideologies, identifying emblems, and so
on). 21 It is quite common to assign to institutions their own intentionality and label them "legal persons." Greimas suggested treating
institutions as "collective actants" or "moral persons" ([1974] 1990 ,
151).
Under the impact of institutional constraints the intentionality of
the individual participants of social acting is seriously impaired.
However, we should resist the popular tendency of social science to
eliminate the person from social acting. For this reason, the "actorsystem" model of Crozier and Friedberg attracts our attention.22
These students of corporate structure do not deny that institutions
impose constraints by yielding power: "Organization as a human
con~truct deals basically with power. It is organizing, regularizing,
tammg power that makes it possible for men to cooperate" (1980, 9).
At the same time, however, they emphasize that "human behavior is
always the expression and consequence of freedom, no matter how
minimal that freedom may be. It reflects choices made by the actor in
order to take advantage of available opportunities within the framewo~k of co~straints imposed upon him'' (1980, 19).23 The concept of
social r_ole 1~ reev~uated by discerning "the possibilities for experi~ent~tlo~, mv~~non, and discovery available to individuals occupymg gr~ren roles (60). Crozier and Friedberg assert the importance
of soC1al representations in the formation and preservation of institutions. A church is based on shared religious beliefs and thus differentiated from other churches; a state's power is reinforced by the ideology of patriotism condensed in unifying and mobilizing emblems.
The sociologists have recognized that the "cultural element" is "of the
III

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

first importance" in all social institutions; for example, there exist different "styles" of bureaucracy-French, American, Japanese. 24 However, true to their antideterministic spirit, Crozier and Friedberg
emphasize that cultural values, norms, and attitudes "structure individual and group capacities in a way which conditions but never determine their strategies" (1980, 103-4). The dialectic of social representations and individual minds, postulated in IV.2.2, is thus
transferred into the domain of social acting.
While accepting the actor-system polarity as the principle of organized social acting, we cannot hide that its balance is precarious. In
institutions with a rigid power structure (the military, the totalitarian
state, institutions of confinement), social control is so strong that the
person effectively loses his or her intentional and actional autonomy
(III.2.1: the prison in Little Dorrit; III.3: totalitarian state in Kundera's
fictional world). From the person's perspective, the social institution
appears as an impersonal force and its functioning as intentionless social process. 25 The course of the process seems to be beyond any person's control, and its end state is no one's intended state.
Social process is a paradoxical phenomenon. Although all the participating individuals are intention-endowed persons, their group enterprise is devoid of intentionality. The highest form of social organization produces uncontrollable events. The social process is thus
analogous to the nature process and joins the mental process (I.8) in
a triad of spontaneous, intentionless, random event-generation. In all
these processes, the individual is manipulated by suprapersonal forces
that he or she is unable to stand up to, because they cannot be identified. In exploring the fate of the individual subject to anonymous,
intentionless social processes, fiction has constructed a new mythology, which ranks among the most powerful achievements of modern
literature (see chap. VIII).

112

I

CHAPTER V

(TE)

Narrative Modalities

The categories of person, nature force, state, event, action, interaction, mental life, and so on, introduced in chapters I-IV, are the elementary building blocks of narrative worlds. But world, let us repeat,
is a macrostructure, and its "order" is determined by global restrictions. Fictional worlds of narrative are organized by two kinds of
macro-operations. The first, selection, determines which constituent
categories will be admitted into the world under construction. The
world's categorJal type is thus fixed: one-person or multiperson
world, a world of physical or mental events, a world of intentional
acting or intentionless processes, a world with nature or without nature, and so on. These types are ideal structures; they combine in
many and different ways to create the categorial order of particular
fictional narrative worlds (as observed in chapters I and III). The second, formative operation, shapes narrative worlds into orders that
have the potential to produce (generate) stories. Modalities are the
main formative factors of this kind. They play this role because they
have a direct impact on acting; they are rudimentary and inescapable
constraints, which each person acting in the world faces. I I£ for example, in a certain world a norm prohibits a certain kind of action,
then the acting of all inhabitants of that world is affected. In action
113

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

theory, the crucial role of modalities was posited by von Wright
(1968); in narratology, their global formative power was recognized
implicitly by Vladimir Propp and explicitly by A. J. Greimas. 2

r. Modal Systems
The modern phase of the logicosemantic analysis of modalities began with two moves: (1) From the classical (Aristotelian) alethic
modality a new, deontic (normative) system was separated: ''A man
can break ('sin against') a normative order, but he cannot break ('sin
against') the laws of nature"; therefore, "from a formal point of view
it is much more convenient to regard the two kinds of modalities, the
deontic and the logical, as independent of one another" (von Wright
1968, 65, 61). (2) It was recognized that the operators of deontic and
alethic modalities have the same formal structure and that this structure corresponds to the triplet oflogical quantifiers (von Wright 1968;
see Follesdal and Hilpinen 1971, 8; Hintikka 1971, 62; Kalinowski
1972, 80; Aquist 1987, 8-11). Other logicians have shown that axiological operators (Rescher 1969; lvin 1970) and epistemic operators
(Hintikka 1962; Hintikka and Hintikka 1989, 17-35) can be similarly
arranged in triplets. Table 2-an expansion of von Wright's table
(1968, 14)-represents, in an analogy with quantifiers, the set of
modal systems appropriated for our fictional semantics. 3
Agents of the actual world have to deal with a tangled bundle of
modal restrictions. But in the formation of fictional worlds modal
systems can be manipulated in many different ways. The elementary
but most productive manipulation puts one of the modal systems
TABLE 2

Operators
Quantifiers

Alethic

Deontic

E some
-E none
-E-all

M possible
-M impossible
- M- necessary

P permitted
- P prohibited
- P- obligatory

114

Axiological

Epistemic

G good
-G bad
-G-indifferent

K known
-K unknown
Ko believed

Narrative Modalities
into a dominant position, blocking the impact of all the others.
Modally homogeneous fictional worlds are thus created. In these
worlds, the basic ("atomic") stories, the core of narrativity, are produced. Let us present this narrative potency by surveying the world
structuring affected by modalities.
2. Alethic Constraints

The alethic modalities of possibility, impossibility, and necessity
determine the fundamental conditions of fictional worlds, especially
causality, time-space parameters, and the action capacity of persons.
2.1. Natural and supernatural worlds. If the modalities of the actual world determine what is possible, impossible, and necessary in
the fictional world, then a natural fictional world is formed. Natural
fictional worlds are a special case of the vast collection of "physically
possible" worlds (Bradley and Swartz 1979, 6; see also Rescher 1975,
144-49; and Pr.2.2 above), worlds where nothing exists and nothing
happens that would violate the laws of the actual world. Using a different term, Kirkham defines the same set of worlds: "Of particular
interest is the subset of naturally possible worlds, which is the subset
of worlds having all and only the same laws of nature as the actual
world" (1992, 15). The alethic conditions of the natural world determine the character of all the world's entities, particularly of its persons. Fictional persons of the natural world are possible counterparts
of humans, their properties and action capacities are fictional projections of actual persons' attributes. 4 An action like walking is possible
for such a fictional person, while becoming invisible is not.
Fictional worlds that violate the laws of the actual world are physically impossible, supernatural worlds. Their main formative principle is a redistribution of the M-operator: what is impossible in the
natural world becomes possible in its supernatural counterpart. I hasten to forestall a serious misunderstanding, one that arises when
physical and logical (im)possibility are confused. Possible-worlds logicians give a lucid explanation of the difference: "By a 'possible

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

world' ... we do not mean only a physical/,y possible world. Countless worlds which are physically impossible are numbered among the
possible worlds .... Physically possible worlds form a proper subset
of all possible worlds; or, to make the contrast somewhat sharper, we
might say that the set of physically possible worlds forms a proper
subset of all logical/,y possible worlds" (Bradley and Swartz 1979, 6,
and figure 1.c; see also Rescher 1975, 155-61; Nolt 1984, 55). In other
words, physically impossible worlds are logically possible. Only
worlds containing or implying contradictions are logically impossible
or impossible simpliciter (Pr.2.2., VI.4.2). By using a modal criterion
to distinguish natural and supernatural worlds, we avoid ontological
commitment and subjective beliefs and skirt changes in scientific
knowledge and interpretation of laws of nature.
The redistribution of the M-operator determines the structure of
the supernatural worlds in several important aspects:
a. Physically impossible beings-gods, spirits, monsters, and so
on-inhabit the supernatural world. They are endowed with properties and action capacities that are denied to persons of the natural
world. Supernatural beings often embody the nature force, so that intentionless causation of events in the natural world becomes intentional acting in its supernatural counterpart.
b. Selected natural-world persons are granted properties and action capacities that are not available to ordinary persons of that
world: becoming invisible, flying on a carpet, and so on. This procedure creates hybrid persons, heroes of myth, fairy tales, and legends,
who are capable of performing supernatural acts while remaining
natural in their basic properties (especially mortality).
c. Inanimate objects are personified, that is, give,n mental life and
intentionality: a statue becomes an agent-the legend of Don Juan,
Aleksandr Puskin's narratives, Prosper Merimee's short story, "La
Venus d'Ille" Qakobson 1987; Todorov 1970, 84-85, 92-93), a mirror
talks in a fairy-tale world, and so on. Animals, as an intermediate category of fictional semantics (II.2), are especially pliable in this respect. In the fictional world of animal stories (the fable being the

116

Narrative Modalities
most obvious example), they are easily transformed into full-fledged
persons with characteristic human properties and action capacities,
including speech.
The natural world generates stories of the human condition.
These stories are many and varied, but from the very beginning of
storytelling they tend to be tragic.5 Their most common pattern is
degradation-from culture to savagery Goseph Conrad's ''An Outpost of Progress"), from civilization to its destruction Qevgenij Zamjatin's ''A Story About the Most Important Thing"), from life to death
Q. W Goethe's The Sufferings ofYoung Werther, Herman Broch's The
Death of Virgil), from riches to poverty (the second part of Little
Dorrit; see III.3 above), from privilege to humiliation (William
Shakespeare's King Lear), from love to betrayal (Gustave Flaubert's
Madame Bovary), from family to solitude (Elsa Morante's Aracoeli).
Moreover, because of the well-known "law'' of interacting, the amelioration of one person usually brings about another person's degradation (see Bremond 1973, 64; here IY.1 above).
The precariousness or wretchedness of the human condition becomes especially striking in contrast with the Edenic condition of the
divinities. In ancient myths, gods "live an easy life apart from us, and
they live forever; they are in continual conflict but experience no real
sorrow or permanent disasters" (Redfield 1975, 31). Yet, paradoxically,
the personalities of the mythological gods, their mental life, motivations, actions, and interactions, are exactly like humans' (see Barnes
1974, 121). The anthropomorphism of divine beings is a telling vestige
of the supernatural world's origin: it is a world transcending the human world but constructed by the human imagination.
The alethic contrast between the natural and the supernatural is
bridged by intermediate worlds. Dreams, hallucination, madness,
drug-induced altered states are physically possible, natural human experiences; at the same time, physically impossible persons, objects,
and events appear in these frames. Fictional stories have exploited the
remarkable potential of intermediate worlds in many forms and functions. Let me just mention the proleptic and "disauthenticating" use

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

of dreams (Traill 1996, 16-17) and the ambiguating function of madness (Dostoevsky's The Double).
2.2.
Alethic endowment. Worlds are constructed as natural or
supernatural by codexal alethic modalities, restrictions imposed on
the world as a whole. But modalities are also subjective, person specific; they differ in scope from one person to another. 6 A subjective
M-operator determines which actions it is possible for a person to
perform. The operator regulates not the opportunities for doing but
a person's "knowing-how-to-do competence" (Greimas [1979] 1989,
n). If for a certain person seeing or swimming is possible, then this
person has the capacity to see or to swim, whether there is or is not
an occasion to put this capacity to use. Supernatural persons (except
for the omnipotent deities) also have their circumscribed alethic endowment, determined by their position in the pantheon, their realm
of governance, and so on. For fictional semantics the alethic potential
of natural (human) persons is of prime interest, and my discussion is
restricted to this case.
The semantics of person and action presented in chapters II and
IV implies that the subjective M-operator regulates three kinds of capacity: physical-the bodily dispositions for performing actions; instrumental-the potency for producing and using instruments; and
mental-the sensory range and the scope of mental operations. The
sum of a person's physical, instrumental, and mental capacities constitutes his or her alethic endowment. This concept is a generalization
of Danto's "schedule or repertoire" of actional powers (1973, 120).
Following the philosopher, we say that a fictional person's alethic endowment is normal when it corresponds to the human standard and
hyponormal if the person suffers some deprivation (having no sense
of smell or being blind, for example). Alethic deprivation, Danto
notes, has serious consequences for the person's existence, since it "affects the entire vocabulary ofexperience" (1973, 130). Fictional semantics complements Danto by introducing the opposite kind of
"deviation," alethic enhancement: a person's endowment, while not
transcending the alethic conditions of the natural world, is above the
standard, is hypernormal. Modal deprivation and enhancement set
n8

Narrative Modalities
the limits of subjective capacity: from total disabling to amazing
physical prowess, from primitive instruments to utopian technology,
from idiocy and insensibility to creativity and "paranormal" powers.
The person's alethic endowment is not fixed once and for all. It is affected by two kinds of change, the development of new capacities
and the loss of existing ones. Capacities are acquired primarily
through learning (teaching) and lost due to forgetting or disabling.
The overall alethic structure of the fictional world is determined
jointly by codexal and subjective M-operators, the former shaping
the entire world, the latter circumscribing the domains of individual
persons. The tension between fixed macroconditions and unruly subjective potentialities is the source of a large family of alethic stories.
Let me present its most dramatic examplar, the story of the alethic
alien.
2.3.
The seeing among the blind. The alethic alien is a fictional
person whose alethic endowment in some fundamental way deviates
from the standard of the world. In H. G. Wells's narrative "The
Country of the Blind" (1904) the alethic standard is such that all the
world's inhabitants are sightless. Otherwise, "they were strong and
able" (105), and the powers of their other senses were enhanced. The
sovereignty of this world is ensured by its complete geographical and
historical isolation. A natural catastrophe has separated the valley
from the outside world and made it all but inaccessible. Historical
isolation was accomplished when the age of the seeing turned into
legend. Wells anticipates Danto in projecting the specific alethic deprivation into a general existential condition: linguistic impoverishment ("the names for all the things of sight had faded and changed"),
psychological displacement ("they had made for themselves new
imaginations with their ever more sensitive ears and finger-tips"), and
mythological peculiarity ("the world ... had been first an empty hollow in the rocks, and then had come, first, inanimate things without
the gift of touch, and llamas and a few other creatures that had little
sense, and then men, and at last angels") (n3). When Nunez, a person endowed with sight, by accident tumbles into the valley, he finds
himself in the role of the alethic alien. The world's inhabitants, judgn9

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

ing him by their alethic standard, consider him hyponormal: his
senses are "imperfect" and he utters "unmeaning words" (111). But
Nunez feels superior to the handicapped populace and tries to enact
the stereotypical script of the normal world: "In the country of the
blind the one-eyed man is king." the easy defeat of his coup d'etat
proves the inferiority of his alethic endowment, and he has to accept
the position of "servitude." He will not become a rightful citizen of
the world unless he undergoes an operation depriving him of sight.
Nunez, although strongly attracted to a woman of the tribe, rejects
this ultimate adaptation. He realizes that only a world seen is beautiful, vast, and free. The narrative breaks off when Nunez, escaping
from the valley, is suspended between the world of the blind and that
of the seeing.
Wells's story confirms the crucial role of alethic modalities in
world construction: they create the foundations, both global and personal, on which fictional worlds are erected and their stories enacted.
The intertwining of codexal and subjective possibilities, impossibilities, and necessities means that the existence and acting of fictional
persons is doubly restricted: by the world's global alethic makeup and
by their individual alethic endowment.7 Perhaps the tragic nature of
the human condition has its roots in the fact that despite all scientific
and technological progress it is beyond a person's capacity to escape
from the alethic restrictions of the natural world.

3. Deontic Constraints
The modalities of the deontic system (the P-operators) affect the
design of fictional worlds primarily as proscriptive or prescriptive
norms; the norms determine which actions are prohibited, obligatory, or permitted (see von Wright 19636). The P-operators differjust as the other modalities do-in their scope (domain of validity):
codexal norms are valid for an entire world, subjective norms spell
out prohibitions or duties for individual persons. Deontic norms are
binding either as tacitly accepted conventions (such are customs of a
culture) or as explicitly promulgated rules, regulations, and laws. 8
120

Narrative Modalities

The promulgation of norms is a privilege of certain persons or social
institutions that have the power of enforcement.
3.1. Store of stories. Once P-norms are introduced into a world,
all actions performed in it are subject to deontic assessment. Under
different deontic conditions, one and the same action can have a
completely different status and consequences. Suppose a person travels to Siberia. By itself, the action is deontically neutral. But when its
P-conditions are specified, the action acquires a deontic marker: it
might be a pleasure trip, if permitted (a tourist's travel), a transgression, if prohibited (a prisoner fleeing from a camp), or a duty, if
obligatory (a businessman going to sign a trade deal).
The deontic marking of actions is the richest source of narrativity;
it generates the famous triad of the fall (violation of a norm-punishment), the test (obligation fulfilled-reward), and the predicament
(conflict of obligations), stories retold again and again, from myths
and fairy tales to contemporary fiction. "Violation" and "test" figure
prominently in Propp's narrative grammar (1928). Predicament has
been defined by von Wright as a condition where the acting person
finds it impossible to satisfy contradictory but equally valid norms.
His example of predicament is the biblical story of Jephthah. 9 The
popularity of these deontic stories justifies the suspicion that in fictional worlds, prohibitions are often imposed only to be violated, and
obligations only for the purpose of not being kept.
The deontic structure of a fictional world changes when new
norms are imposed and existing norms modified or lifted. When a
prohibition or obligation is lifted, the actions under its scope become
permitted. Since this change expands the domain of the permitted
and thereby the freedom of the persons acting in the world, it underlies the story of deontic acquisition. Narratives of social, national,
racial, and personal liberation exemplify prominently this structure.
In contrast, the imposition of new prohibitions or obligations narrows the scope of the permissible and thus generates the story of deontic loss. Narratives of enslavement, oppression, and confinement
implement this pattern.
The presence of a deontic codex in the fictional world brings
121

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

about inevitable tensions between subjective moral postures and socially imposed norms; the persons' attitudes toward the codex range
from conformity to innovation to rebellion (see Merton 1957,
139-57). The most popular story of moral tension is that of forbidden
passion. As long as Mme. de Renal, in Stendahl's Le Rouge et le Noir
(1830), cultivates her relationship with Julien as if she were free of
obligation, she experiences only the delights of erotic play. However,
when she is forcefully made aware that she loves a man "who is not
her husband" [qui n'est point son mari], her pleasure turns into pain.
Accepting the deontic codex of her world, she marks her actions as
adultery (see Tanner 1979, 15-16) and submits to the iron logic of the
story of the fall.
3.2. Raskolnikov and Svejk. The story of the deontic alien is the
most telling instance of the conflict between the deontic codex and
personal desires. The deontic alien is a person who exempts himself
from the world's codex and follows his own principles. Raskolnikov, the
hero of F. M. Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment (1866), elaborates
an explicit ideological justification of the alien's privilege: "extraordinary" men are permitted, or even have the duty to do, what the codex
prohibits because their mission "might involve the salvation of all
mankind" (pt. 3., chap. 5). Under this exemption, murdering an old
woman pawnbroker is no more than killing a louse. Raskolnikov remains true to his ideology to the very end: in a conversation with sister Dunja (pt. 6, chap. 7) he insists that he did not commit any
crime, and even in Siberia (the epilogue) he feels no remorse. But no
rational justification can save him from the emotional consequences
of the transgression, from a strange, uncontrollable malaise. Having
killed a human being, Raskolnikov "killed himsel£"
In subjecting Raskolnikov to the logic of the story of the fall, Dostoevsky builds a case against the Ubermensch, who, by fiat, emancipates himself from absolute (theonomous) norms. Not all norms
have such authority; indeed, many are backed by institutions of dubious legitimacy. The person who challenges a codex imposed by
such an institution acts, in fact, on a higher moral authority, and,
therefore, the fall is not necessarily his or her story. The remarkable
122

Narrative Modalities
hero ofJaroslav Hasek's The Good Soldier Svejk (1921-23) is a deontic
alien with a captivating mission and a peculiar means of achieving it.
The good soldier lives in a fictional world ruled exclusively by
obligations and prohibitions. The modality of obligation governs social acting, that of prohibition, personal acting. The norms of Svejk's
fictional world are backed by the quintessential institution of arrogant authority, the military. The inhabitants of a fictional world
where everything is either obligatory or prohibited and where nothing is permitted have two basic strategies at their disposal: either they
discharge the obligations and as loyal subordinates give up personal
intentions, or they act against the prohibitions and become transgressors (outlaws). Svejk's originality is in devising and successfully
pursuing a new strategy for coping with the conditions of this world,
the strategy of homo ludens. 10 Svejk's playacting takes many verbal
and physical forms. It achieves true mastery in adventurous expeditions, such as the "Budejovice anabasis" (vol. 2, chap. 2), where Svejk,
strictly following orders, creates a space ofludic freedom. To be sure,
his escapades are short-lived; he is taken for a transgressor and
stopped by the powers that be. In the end, however, his professions of
innocence are accepted, and the good soldier returns nonchalantly to
the obligatory road.
Svejk's ludic strategy is plainly inadequate for changing the deontic conditions of his fictional world, but it has serious consequences
for the authority of the norm-giving institution. Svejk's playful challenge strips the military machine of its imperial clothes and shows it
for what it is: absurd and ridiculous.

4. Axiological Constraints
There are many "varieties" of goodness and badness (see von
Wright 1963c), but the general effect of the G-operators is to transform the world's entities (objects, states of affairs, events, actions, persons) into values and disvalues. Axiological codex is a valorization of
the world by a social group, a culture, a historical period. But valorization is strongly dependent on personality structure, and so the
123

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

axiological modalities are eminently prone to subjectivization: what
is a value for one person might be a disvalue for another one. 11 The
overall axiological structuring of fictional worlds is a product of diverse combinations and hierarchies of codexal and subjective G-operators.
4.1. The quest. The valorization of the world is, perhaps, the
strongest stimulus of acting: the presence of values and disvalues
evokes desires and repulsions (II.5.2). For an ordinary person, values
are desirable, attractive, and disvalues undesirable, repugnant. 12 If a
person lacks a desired value, he or she is likely to initiate actions that
would bring that value into his or her possession. Value acquisition is
the basic axiological story, usually enveloped in the quest narrative. A
host of fictions, ranging from the expedition of the Argonauts to love
stories, are manifestations of this structure (for the tradition of the
quest in English and American literature, see Schulz 1981).
The personal axiological relationships substantially complicate the
structure of the quest. If the quester desires and tries to acquire a
value that a holder strives to hold onto, conflict is inevitable, unless
the holder surrenders the value in a gesture of sacrifice or gift. It can
readily be seen that similar intentional and actional consequences
arise if two questers compete for one and the same value. In contrast,
the quester and his or her helper(s) (allies) engage in cooperative acting to acquire the desired value (IV.3-1, 3.3).
4.2. Pecorin and Babbitt. Subjective abnegation of the world's
axiological order generates the story of the axiological alien. This role,
typical of, but not restricted to, the "romantic hero," assumes many
forms, "ranging in a spectrum from imperfect assimilation to an apparently thorough rejection" (Garber 1982, 153). Two of these aliens,
the nihilist and the axiological rebel, deserve special mention.
The nihilist is a person who negates the axiological order of the
world and replaces it with a subjective axiology that has a single operator: indifference. Rejecting the very procedure of valorization, the
nihilist constructs a world without values and disvalues. His credo is
expressed in no uncertain terms by Peforin, the protagonist of
Michail Lermontov'sA Hero of Our Time (1840): "We are, to tell the
124

Narrative Modalities
truth, rather indifferent to everything except our own selves" (262;
93). "I laugh at everything in the world, especially at feelings" (283;
121). Since the nihilist's devalorization affects especially the basic human values, such as love, friendship, and charity, his or her actions
are consistently destructive. Peforin destroys his friendship with
Grusnickij (and then Grusnickij himself), his relationship with Mary,
and even his love for Vera, the only true feeling he ever experienced.13
The axiological rebel negates the G-codex by setting up a contrary
subjective axiology. What is a value in the codex is disvalue in the
rebel's subjective system, and the converse is also true. Sinclair Lewis's
novel Babbitt (1922) constructs a fictional world where American
middle-class values reign supreme. The codex valorizes material objects into signs of social status and imposes standardization and conformism. The bedroom in Babbitt's house was decorated "after one of
the best standard designs, with a standard electric bedside lamp ...
and a standard bedside book. . . . Every second house in Floral
Heights had a bedroom precisely like this" (18-19). Babbitt is an axiologically well-adjusted person, "loyal and important" (15); the "bohemian" Doppelbraus are treated with suspicion and even derision.
But suddenly, having counted all his values, Babbitt discovers a gap
in the stock: "I don't know that I am entirely satisfied." The vague
feeling of the lack of "true" value motivates Babbitt's rejection of suburbia's codex and his return to the ideals of youth. His rebellion is a
liberating act, which gives him satisfaction, even happiness. But it is
short-lived. Babbitt is quickly brought back into the pack, returning
to his family, community, business: "He swore faith to his wife ... to
Zenith ... to business efficiency ... to the Boosters' Club ... to
every faith of the Clan of Good Fellows" (352). Yet the last act of Babbitt's fictional existence is a gesture of defiance: he gives his blessing
and encouragement to his son, an axiological rebel of the new generation (365).

125

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

5. Epistemic Constraints
The modal system of knowledge, ignorance, and belief imposes
epistemic order on the fictional world. Codexal epistemic modalities
are expressed in social representations, such as scientific knowledge,
ideologies, religions, cultural myths. Subjective K-operators define a
personal epistemic set, an individual's knowledge of and beliefs about
self and the world. The subjective epistemic set includes selected and
synthesized pieces of "internalized" social knowledge and beliefs
(IV.2.2). The person of the fictional world is an epistemic "monad,"
perceiving himself or herself, other persons, and the entire world
from a definite and distinct vantage point. The person's practical reasoning and, consequently, his or her acting and interacting are to a
high degree determined by this epistemic perspective, by what the
agent knows, is ignorant of, and believes to be the case in the world.
5-1. Epistemic quest. Epistemic modalities release their storygenerating energy because of uneven distribution of knowledge
among the fictional persons. The epistemic imbalance produces the
basic epistemic narrative, the story with a secret (mystery story):
something that happened in the fictional world remains unknown to
(some of) its inhabitants, or they have false beliefs about it. The
structure of the mystery story was described by Sklovskij (1929), who
perceived it not only in detective stories but also in Dickens' Little
Dorrit (Ill.3.2). 14 Rutherford distinguishes three stages of the enigma:
its posing, its intensification through a series of partial, delayed, and
suspect answers, and its solution. He points out that some genres
(such as the detective story) provide "simple, definitive and absolute"
solutions, while others (such as the psychological novel) might suggest a "plurality'' of solutions (1975, 208). Barthes, who includes epistemic modalities in his system of "codes" under the label "hermeneutic code," expands on Sklovskij's notion of "retardation"-specifying
snare, equivocation, partial answer, suspended answer, and jamming-all aimed at heightening suspense and the reader's curiosity
(1970, 82). The suspense-surprise pattern accounts for the perennial
allure of the mystery story.

126

Narrative Modalities

:he

story with a secret is a particular case of epistemic quest, a narrative whose modal base is the transformation of ignorance or false
belief into knowledge. The wide range of the epistemic quest has
been indicated by Todorov (1971, 1975): La Quete du Graal some
sh~rt st~ries of Henry James, and Joseph Conrad's Heart ofDarkness.
Ep1stem1c quest can also be perceived at the core of the Bildungsroman.15 To be sure, Bildungsroman has a broader thematic scope: it is
a narrative of "the Werden of an individual hero," of his or her "mat~~ing pro~ess" (Swales 1978, 28, 30; V.7 above). However, the acquismon of skills and the growth of knowledge is the thread in this process. The epistemic base is perceived by Suleiman, who defines the
Bildungsroman's story as "two parallel transformations undergone by
the protagonist: first, a transformation from ignorance (of self) to
knowledge (of self); second, a transformation from passivity to action"
(1983, 65). In the model of the German Bildungsroman, J. W.
Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship [Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre] (1795-96), the hero's epistemic growth includes the unraveling
of seve:al mysteries (unknown or unclear kinship relationships).
Goethe s novel constructs the process of maturation not as a linear
knowledge accumulation but as a series of trials and errors. Social institutions-artistic (the theater) and political (the Society of the
Tower)-:-provide passageways through which Wilhelm progresses toward wisdom. In Goethe's construction, the Bildung of a person is
no~ ~o much the achievement of certain goals as a continual cognitive
stnvmg (see Selbmann 1984, 74). What Wilhelm learns is not certainties but the "coexisting possibilities within human existence"
(Swales 1978, 70).
5.2. Deception. Communication between fictional persons (IY. 1.2)
has an epistemic aspect of its own: it is subject to truth-valuation with
respect to the fictional world's state of affairs (VI.2). Persons utter true
or fals_e state~ents, lies, rumors, and so on. Lying, insinuating,
spreadmg gossip contrary to fictional facts are the deceiver's tools for
influen~ing a person or persons who either do not know or disregard
the fict10nal facts. The deceiver's goal is to induce the ignorant person to act on false information. The most famous of all deceivers,

127

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

Shakespeare's Iago, convinces Othello of Desdemona's infidelity and
leads him, with the help of self-deception and the Moor's blind passion, to murder her. Although racial prejudice lingers in the background, the story of deception in Othello is played out primarily by
interpersonal emotional motivations: Iago's envy, Othello's jealously,
Desdemona's faithfulness.
What is personal in Othello is social in E. M. Forster's A Passage to
India (1924). Here, the self-deception that feeds false information is
the social and racial prejudice of the colonialists. Major Callendar,
the undiplomatic spokesman of these social representations and emotions, puts it bluntly: "They [the Indians] give me the creeps" (44).
In this semiotic environment, Miss Quested's report grows into a sort
of communal folktale that constructs Dr. Aziz's conspiratorial and
premeditated "crime" (176). While a formal legal procedure is followed, Dr. Aziz is found guilty before his trial by "herd emotion"
(159). 16 When Miss Quested, in a decisive moment, refuses to sustain
the lie, she is proclaimed a traitor who "had renounced her own people" (212). In rejecting the social representations of her social group,
she has become an epistemic alien and has to leave the scene.

6. Dyadic Worlds
So far, I have been dealing with modally homogeneous fictional
worlds. These atomic structures, limited in number, combine, alternate, intersect, and overlap in diverse ways to form an unlimited
number of composite, molecular fictional worlds (see Chan 1991).
The simplest, but very prominent, case is a unification in one fictional world of two domains in which contrary modal conditions
reign. A modally heterogeneous, dyadic world is thus produced. The
structure of the dyadic world could also be explained as a split within
the fictional world effected by the redistribution of codexal modalities of one and the same modal system.
All modal systems have the potential for constructing dyadic
worlds. The prime dyadic structure of the alethic modality is the
mythological world, constituted by a combination of the natural and
128

Narrative Modalities
the supernatural domains. The representative dyadic world of the deontic type is formed by redistributing the operators of prohibition
and permission: what is prohibited in one domain is permitted in the
other one, or what is permitted in one is prohibited in the other. In
the fundamental dyadic world of the axiological type, the opposite
domains are established by contrary axiological codexes: what is value
in one domain (for one group or culture) turns into disvalue in the
other domain (for a different group or culture). Finally, the rudimentary dyadic structure in the epistemic type arises if the world
consists of a known and an unknown domain.
Dyadic worlds, due to their inner semantic tension, are fecund
sources of stories. 17 I demonstrate this narrative potential by focusing
on the mythological world.
6.r. The mythological world. The two conjoined domains of the
mythological world are not only clearly differentiated alethically but
also strictly demarcated. 18 The inhabitants of the supernatural domain have access into the natural domain, but for the humans the supernatural domain is, as a rule, off limits. Being physically inaccessible, the supernatural domain is beyond human cognition; it appears
as a mysterious, hidden, transcendent "black hole." The minds of the
inhabitants of the natural domain are obsessively attracted to this
mystery; their thirst for knowledge feeds on any account, even the
most dubious, offered by self-appointed informers. Because these accounts are not independently verifiable, they gain credence only
thanks to a special authority or exceptional status of the informer
(prophet, god-inspired scribe, and so on). These reports are often
contradictory, but they are eagerly passed on. The myth reinforces itself by reasserting its structure in narrative transmission.
The asymmetry of the accessibility relationship is complemented
by the asymmetry of power. The mythological cosmology is a strictly
hierarchical system, and this hierarchy determines the character of interaction between the humans and the supernatural beings. Any attempt to interfere in the gods' affairs invariably ends in disaster for
the human (the story of Sisyphus). A conflict with gods has no
chance of success, as the mighty fighter Diomedes learns: the gods
129

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

can be wounded but never defeated, because they are immortal (Iliad, bk. 5). In contrast, there is no warranty against gods intervening
in human affairs. The deities might scorn "the creatures of the day,"
but they "were irresistibly drawn to med.dle in mortal affairs, sometimes directly, but more often by pulling strings behind the scenes"
(Barnes 1974, 97). Even when their dominion over the natural realm
is circumscribed by some rules or conventions, the interventions of
divinities are capricious, often arrogant, and, therefore, unpredictable. In the mythological world, humans are never and nowhere
safe from supernatural beings.
A common venue for gods and spirits to intervene indirectly is
mental influencing-implanting in a person's mind an intention or
desire (through a dream, e.g.). As the "personification of Chance,"
the supernatural interveners often use the means of accident to
achieve their intention (weapons break, a warrior is overcome by
dizziness, etc.) (Barnes 1974, no). When they intrude by direct action, they do not hesitate to use guises or disguises, adopting the
physical appearance of a natural-world being. The story of Amphytrion proves that this cunning device enables the divinity to deceive even the most faithful of humans. Divine interventions often
cause events of a supernatural character to happen in the natural domain. Such violations of the modal codex are perceived by the human inhabitants as radical disruptions of the natural order, as miracles. Again, miraculous interventions confirm and reinforce the myth,
since it is only within the world of this structure that they can occur.
The history of the mythological world begins with the story of
creation: the natural world is brought into existence as the offspring
of the primordial supernatural world. Different cultures produced
different versions of the creation myth. In the Biblical version, it is
God's performative speech act that accomplishes the alethic transformation of nothing into the existing universe. 19 The second step in
the dyadic structure formation is the divorce of the human world
from the divine world-the story of the fall or paradise lost. Cohabitation with the divinity ends when the humans are expelled from
their supernatural Edenic habitat into the toils of the natural world.
130

Narrative Modalities
In this story, which prefigures the narratives of degradation characteristic of the human condition (Y.2.1), the alethic division within the
mythological world is finalized.
6.2. Cross-world journeys. In the divided world with rigid
boundaries, the story of the cross-world journey is of perennial fascination. Special permits are needed to visit the supernatural domain,
and they are granted only to selected humans for a definite purpose
and under strict conditions. The story of the cross-world journey exists in two variants. In the first, the visitor is, basically, an observer.
Odysseus's visit to Hades (bk. II of the Odyssey) is the classic of this
kind. Odysseus was advised by Kirke to dig a ditch to separate himself from the dead. He cannot interact physically with the beings of
the netherworld but engages in communication across the world divide. The problem of language does not exist: the dead understand
and use the language of the living visitor. In the second version, exemplified by the myth of Orpheus, the human visitor is allowed into
the netherworld to carry out a mission. Orpheus is partially and temporarily released from his alethic bondage but, in return, is bound by
a strict deontic condition. The mission is initially successful, but
when Orpheus violates the prohibition he is severely punished and
has to return to the human world without his beloved wife.
Modern versions of the cross-world journey draw on the traditional pattern of the story to achieve new effects. The devil of Le
Sage's Le Diable boiteux (1707) travels in the opposite direction, to
observe, and to comment on, the natural world. But in several
episodes he succumbs to the temptation to intervene in the human
world by physical acts. He thus follows a time-honored tradition that
gives supernatural beings the capacity to act in the natural world. Alice, in Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865), appropriates the device of disguise in her repeated changes of physical appearance (getting smaller or taller). 20 The changes are not necessary
for Alice's acting in the visited realm, since her physical interventions
are minimal. They are purposeless, playful metamorphoses, mimicking the ludic conditions of Wonderland. Alice's avid participation in
communication compensates for the frugality of her physical interac131

NARRATIVE

WORLDS

tion. In this respect, again, she adapts perfectly to Wonderland's
mode of existence. Its inhabitants do little more than talk, exploring
the creative, ludic, and performative potentialities of speech acts.
There is no need for Alice to acquire these verbal capacities: a child is
at home in the world of word play. And no linguistic adaptation is
necessary, either; thanks to the ancient narrative convention of the
dyadic world, the natives ofWonderland are masters of Alice's human
language.

132

PART TWO

Intensional Functions

-

STARTER TERMS

I.

II

Extension and Intension

Frege suggested that the meaning of verbal expressions is constituted by two interlaced constituents, reference and sense. In this
book reference is named extension and sense, intension. 1 There are
some precedents for this usage. For example, a textbook of logic for
linguists maintains that the distinction extension/intension "now has
roughly the same import as Frege's 'Sinn' and 'Bedeutung'" (Allwood,
Andersson, and Dahl 1977, 126 n. 1). Lyons states that intension and
extension are terms "used for the same, or at least a similar, contrast"
as sense and reference (1977, 1:174). A French linguist, expressly recalling Frege, locates "extensional identity'' on the level of reference and
"intensional identity'' on the level of sense (Fuchs 1982, 16). But the
terminological pair will only create confusion in literary semantics if
we do not keep in mind two caveats. First, intension is in spelling very
dose to, and in pronunciation indistinguishable from intention, a
term designating a completely different notion (Linsky 1983, xxixxiii; II.2 above). Second, in logical semantics the term intension or
135

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

intensional context denotes compound syntactic structure, where standard rules of the propositional calculus do not apply, such as, "John
believes that Paul is a traitor'' (see Guenthner 1978, 46-47, for a partial list). What logicians call intensional semantics is, usually, the
logic of such contexts (Pelc 1977; Kutschera 1979; van Benthem
1988).
There seems to be widespread agreement about what extensions
are; most definitions, like the following one, are just rewordings of
the traditional notion: "The extension of an expression is the object
or set of objects referred to, pointed to, or indicated by, the expression" (Kirkham 1992, 4). In other words, extension is the meaning
constituent of a linguistic sign that directs the sign toward the
world.2 Extension directs the linguistic sign toward the world, but
the world's objects cannot describe or represent extensions. Extensional meaning has to be expressed in a metalanguage, in a normalized representational system. The struggle of modern semantics with
the problem of extension is the struggle to design languages that denote extensions and extensions only. An ideal extensional language
would be characterized by one-to-one correspondence between world
entities and their designations. Natural language, obviously, does not
possess this property. Artificial (or semiartificial) taxonomical systems
(vitamins designated by letters of the alphabet, botanical and zoological terminology, the formulas of chemistry) and logical, mathematical, and programming formalisms come dose to the ideal of extensional language. These representations, however, are useful only for
special, restricted purposes.3 In order to represent extensional meaning in "ordinary" language and in literature, we need a universal extensional metalanguage. Every student and reader of literature is familiar with informal extensional representations produced by
paraphrasing: themes, content abstracts, story and plot summaries,
interpretations. We know also of sporadic attempts to design a more
rigorous, although necessarily partial, extensional metalanguage for
narrative (Tomasevskij's motifs, Propp's functions, Greimas's actants).
Proceeding in this direction, I have proposed a two-level extensional
representation of motifs (in STI.2.1-2.2). Yet, as we know, the first

Starter Terms JI
part of this book is concerned not with elementary narrative units
but with narrative macrostructures. It is an extensional semantics of
fictional worlds.
While major problems remain in the project of extensional semantics, the concept of intension, being still more complex, is understood in radically different ways. Leaving aside the previously
mentioned intensional contexts, we can record two recent conceptions. First, according to Montague's "grammar," intensions are functions from extensions to possible worlds (Montague 1974; see also
Tichy 1971, 278). Yet, as Barbara Partee has pointed out, this conception is not sufficiently fine to be accepted as a theory of intensional
meaning: Montague's functions "are still functions in an extensional
sense," because possible worlds are, after all, extensional sets (1989,
119). In an earlier comment, another feature of Montague's "grammar"
was noted: "This analysis of intension has made the concept essentially language-independent. An intension has extralinguistic entities
both as its domain (possible worlds) and as its range (objects and
truth-value)" (Allwood, Andersson, and Dahl 1977, 129). A "languageindependent" intensional semantics is of no use in the study of literary meaning, a meaning necessarily expressed in a particular language.
In the second conception, intension of an expression is thought
of as "the informational content of the expression (Kirkham 1992, 8).
Here, intension corresponds to "dictionary meaning" and can be expressed by means of "interpretants." Intensional meaning becomes
"language-dependent,"4 but the conception still does not satisfy the
needs ofliterary semantics, primarily for one reason: expressions with
one and the same informational content are treated as "intensionally
equivalent" and, therefore, mutually substitutable: bachelor/unmarried man, heart/blood-pumping organ, Walter Scott/the author of
Waverley.
Literary texts thrive precisely on exploiting the semantic differences of expressions with the same informational content, revealing
the vacuity of the notion of intensional equivalence (synonymy).
They demonstrate that intension is necessarily linked to texture, to
the form (structuring) of its expression; it is constituted by those
137

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

meanings, which the verbal sign acquires through and in texture
(STI.2.3).5 Speaking formally, intensions are functions from extensions to textures. Intensional fictional semantics links the possibleworlds framework to text theory.
The crucial role of intensional meaning in literature is explained
by aesthetic factors: extensional meaning is aesthetically neutral; only
on the level of intension is aesthetically effective meaning achieved.
In its semantics, literature (poetry) aims in the direction opposite to
science: it is a communicative system for activating and putting to
maximal use the resources of intensionality in language;6 Literary
scholars have cultivated the study of intensional meaning without being aware of it. Poetic figures and devices, the meaning of rhymes and
sound patterns, anagrams and other covert meanings, the "poetry of
grammar," the "semantic gesture," narrative modes, represented discourse, and so on-all are intensional phenomena (see Dolezel 1990,
esp. chaps. 4, 5 7). But these efforts hit again and again one seemingly
insurmountable heuristic obstacle: how to represent intensional
meaning. Being fully determined by its texture, intensional meaning
is affected by any textural change; it is nonparaphrasable, it slips
through the net of "interpretants," it is lost in retelling. Any paraphrasing, any interpretation destroys the intensional meaning in the
process of destroying the original texture. We are reminded of
Brooks's "heresy of paraphrase" (Brooks 1947) and left with a rather
uninspiring prospect: intensional meaning of a literary text cannot be
conveyed otherwise than by repeating that text. 7
Yet the claim that intensional meaning is texture dependent condemns us neither to the "heresy of paraphrase" (to reducing intensions to extensions) nor to the heuristic cul-de-sac. On the contrary,
it opens the way for us to study intensions indirectly, through the observable, analyzable structuring of texture. Telling examples are "descriptive" words and phrases that reveal their intensional meaning by
the constituents involved in their composition: baker, bedroom, Dartmouth, morning star, evening star, and so on. The intensions of morecomplex linguistic forms, particularly sentences, are derived by accumulation, that is, by building up the intensions of higher-order units
138

Starter Terms II
from intensions of lower-order constituents (see Dummett 1973,
152-53). The importance of semantic accumulation for intensional semantics cannot be overemphasized. But it has to be emphasized
equally strongly that semantic accumulation is not simple additivity;
as already recognized by Husserl and Mukafovsky (see Steiner and
Steiner 1979, 60-65), it generates "emergent" meaning by a totalizing
projection of linear constituents (Dolezel 1990, 156, 158). Ultimately,
the formation of the text's intensional meaning is a global, macrostructural happening, just as the organization of its fictional world is.
2. Intensional Function

The fictional worlds presented in part I of this book are extensional entities. Their constituents, shapes, and structures are not tied
to the wording of the constructing fictional text but are fixed by paraphrasing, by a translation of the original texture into extensional representations. But, obviously, fictional worlds are constructed by the
author and reconstructed by the reader in and through the fictional
text's original wording (texture), that is, as intensional formations.
The intensional world structuring is formally represented by the concept of intensional function. In accordance with the general definition of intension, it is a function from the fictional text's texture to
the fictional world.
The method of indirect analysis, proposed in STII.1, identifies intensional functions by uncovering the global "morphology'' of texture, its formative principles, its stylistic regularities. 8 Intensional
function is redefined as a global regularity of texture that affects the
structuring of the fictional world. Textural regularities generate intensional structuring of fictional worlds, complementary to, and no
less important than, their extensional structuring. Let us explain this
generative power by examining the simplest case, the two-value intensional function.

If a writer wants to name a fictional person, language offers him or
her .a choice between two basic modes of singular reference: proper
name, "Odysseus," and definite description, "the king oflthaca," "the
139

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

hero of the Odyssey." The proper name designates the person rigidly
(Pr.2.1; Ep.4) and, therefore, independently of the name's form, the
definite description nonrigidly and in dependence on its verbal form.
We can say that in standard use proper names have zero intension,
while definite descriptions carry intensions expressed by their variable
verbal form. The intension of "the king of Ithaca'' is different from
that of "the hero of the Odyssey. "9 If the writer assigns the two kinds
of singular reference to his fictional persons in a consistent way, then
his texture displays a regularity of naming. Such is the case in Defoe's
Robinson Crusoe: three persons of its world are given proper names"Robinson," "Xury," and "Friday''-while all the other inhabitants are
named by definite descriptions only-"my father," "the Portuguese
captain," "the English captain's widow," "Friday's father," and so on.
This regularity operates as intensional function in the following
way: As extensional entities, the persons of a fictional world can be
individualized and distinguished from each other by some extensional, identifying labels-say, by the lowercase letters of the alphabet. If each fictional person is assigned consistently one of the two
available forms of naming, the textural regularity splits the agential
constellation into two subsets: one comprising persons named rigidly
(by proper names), the other composed of persons designated nonrigidly (by definite descriptions). The function thus provides a mapping of the extensional set onto an intensionally structured set. The
intensional function "transfers" the global regularity of naming from
the fictional text into the fictional world, imposing on the world a
particular intensional structuring. Schema 2 is a representation of the
intensional function of naming and of its structuring effect on the
fictional world of Robinson Crusoe. In the intensional world structure
a trio of acting persons, the hero and his two slaves, forms a domain
different from that of the other acting persons.
This splitting of the world into two domains reminds us of the division of the mythological world into a natural and a supernatural
domain (V.6.1). There is, however, a fundamental difference between
the two cases: the dyadic character of the mythological world results
form a redistribution of alethic modalities and, therefore, is an ex-

Starter Terms II

Schema2
W(E)

-----

T

-- --

.-.--

•

+

a

6

W(I)

Robinson Crusoe

-- -

•

+

Friday

•

X

C

d

my father

-

X

.

the Portuguese

captain

W(E) Extensional structure
W(I) Intensional structure
T Texture

Proper name
x Definite description

+

tensional, paraphrasable structuring; the structuring represented in
schema I is intensional. There are two logically related reasons for
claiming that through the intensional function we have reached the
domain of sense:
a. This structuring is fully determined by the fictional text's texture. If the naming of fictional persons followed a different regularity,
the intensional structuring of the world would be different. If there is
no regularity of this sort, no intensional function of naming operates
in the fictional text, and the fictional world lacks this structuring.
This dependence of the world structure on the form of texture is the
essence of our notion of intensionality.
b. One and the same fictional world can be structured intensionally in many different ways by different intensional functions. In this
thesis a feature of Frege's "sense" is reflected: a variety of senses can be
associated with one and the same referent, the various senses "illuminating" the referent's different aspects (Frege [1892] 1969, n9-20). Intensional functions thus provide what we have expected from them:
they give us an indirect but operational access to the empire of sense
in its most complex and subtle manifestation, in the structuring of
fictional worlds.

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

Schema 3
the Director (Bank)

A two-value function is the simplest form of singular term assignment. Generally, languages offer more than two intensionally differentiated modes of naming, such as first names, surnames, nicknames,
artificial names, stable and changing definite descriptions, and so on.
In Franz Kafka's The Trial a complex regularity of naming can be observed: its fictional persons are named consistently and solely by surname ("Block," "Fraulein Bilrstner"), first name ("Leni "), artificial abbreviation ("K."), and fixed definite description ("the Director," "the
judge"). Consequently, the regularity of naming in The Trial is a multivalue intensional function that arranges the set of its inhabitants
into concentric circles with the protagonist-the only one named by
abbreviation-at the center (see Dolezel 1983 for details of this intensional structuring). Schema 3 is a telling representation of this intensional structuring.
Although extensions and intensions can and must be differentiated in semantic theory, they are by definition complementary in the
production ofliterary meaning. Extensions are available only through
intensions and, conversely, intensions are fixed by extensions. We can
142

Starter Terms II
speculate that the authors conceive the fictional world first as an extensional structure, inventing the story, individuating the acting persons in their properties and relationships, setting them in landscapes
and cityscapes; then, by writing a text of a particular texture, they
give an intensional shape to the world. Conversely, the readers are
presented first with the intensional structuring, since they access the
fictional world through the text's texture; by information or formalized paraphrasing they translate the texture into extensional representations and thus reconstruct the extensional world structure and its
parts-story, character portraits, landscapes, and cityscapes. Following the readers' reconstruction, fictional macrosemantics involves
three successive analytic procedures: it apprehends the regularities of
texture; from these regularities it derives the intentional structuring
of the fictional world; by applying an extensional metalanguage (e.g.,
paraphrase) it reconstructs the extensional world structuring. The fictional world structure is not a set of separated levels but a set of transformations converting one level into another.
The project of the intensional macrosemantics of fiction is ambitious. We do not know how many and what kinds of intensional
functions can be discovered. To start the project off, I investigate two
functions: the authentication function (chap. VI) and the saturation
function (chap. VII). There are reasons to claim that these functions
are essential for the intensional world structuring: the first determines
what exists in the fictional world, the second, how densely the fictional world is populated.

143

I

CHAPTER VI

(TE)

Authentication

Our semantics rests on one basic ontological assumption: to exist actually is to exist independently of semiotic representation; to exist fictionally means to exist as a possible constructed by semiotic means.
In other words, fictional worlds are a special kind of possibles, possibles brought into fictional existence. Any of the semiotic systems
(media) has the ability to call possibles into fictional existence, and
each has its own procedures or mechanisms for accomplishing the
task. In the semiotic system called literature, fictional entities owe
their existence to a special kind of world-constructing text, the fictional text (Pq). The text's power to grant fictional existence is explained by the procedure of authentication and formally expressed in
the intensional function of authentication. Two questions have to be
answered to justify this claim: first, which global features of the texture regulate the authentication function, and, second, how do they
affect fictional existence? The answers to these questions lead us into
the center of the literary fiction-making enterprise.

145

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

r. World Construction as Performative Force
We start our search by excluding one possible direction: fictional
existence does not depend on the "truth" of fictional sentences, because these sentence lack truth-value (Pr.2.1). The world-constructing
act cannot be identified with, or compared to, imaging speech acts,
such as stating truth or falsehood, lying, imitating, or pretending. All
these speech acts presuppose the independent existence of a world to
which the corresponding sentences refer, fail to refer, or pretend to
refer. Basing fictional semantics on any of the imaging speech acts
means missing the very nature of world making (Pr. 3). Fictional texts
can carry out the function of authentication precisely because they
are exempt from truth-valuation; they are performative speech acts.
According to J. L. Austin, the "discoverer'' of the performative speech
act, this act carries a special illocutionary force: if uttered under appropriate felicity conditions, "it is or is a part of, the doing ~fan_ action" (Austin 1962, 5). Or, as Austin puts it in another contnbunon,
it "has its own special job, it is used to perform an action'' (Austin
1
1971, 13; see also Austin 1970, 235; Searle 1979, 16-17; Urmson 1979).
The changes in the world that performatives can bring about are less
or more substantial, up to and including the most radical ones-the
world's creation or destruction. The authentication force of the fictional text, its capacity to create fictional worlds, is a special kind of
performative force.2 If uttered felicitously, the literary perform~tive
changes a possible entity into a fictional fact. In other words, fictional
fact is a possible entity authenticated by a felicitous literary speec~ act.3
The term fact is very apposite here, if we take it, as some philosophers have, as a "quasi-linguistic" entity. "There is no way," states
Warnock, "of identifying a fact except as that which so1;11e true statement states, or as that which some person states in making a true
statement" (1963, 13).4 If 'fictional fact' is understood in this way, then
literary theory and aesthetics have at their disposal a much needed
general term for the constituents of fictional worlds.
It remains to specify the felicity conditions of the world-constructing performative. Austin, let us be reminded, maintained that a

Authentication
necessary (although not the only) felicity condition of the performative is the speaker's authority. To take one of Austin's examples: a ship
can be named only by "the person properly authorized to name it"
(Austin 1962, 14). Who are the speakers "properly authorized" to authenticate literary performatives? There can be no uniform answer to
this question. The illocutionary diversity of literary texts means a diversity of authentication "authorities." This holds especially true
about narrative texts, which are the instruments of the narrativeworld construction.
The plurality of discourses in the narrative text is well known to
narratology. The basic factor of this plurality is the dual source of the
narrative texture-the narrator and the fictional person(s). To be
sure, the actual producer of the entire text is its author; yet its texture,
its formal, semantic, and illocutionary features, are determined by the
opposition of the narrator's and the characters' discourse. 5 The opposition creates a tension within the narrative text that ultimately gave
rise to a gamut of narrative discourse types, ranging from a strictly
objective to a purely subjective. The diversity of the narrative texture
has been studied in detail, and various typologies of narrative discourses have been suggested. 6
But narrative discourses are not mere playing with pronouns or focalization. The illocutionary diversity of the narrative text becomes
semantically relevant when we recognize that its main purpose is to
construct fictional existence as an intensional phenomenon. Authentication functionlinks the diversity of narrative discourses and the
modes of fictional existence. The claim that fictional existence is an
intensional phenomenon has radical consequences for fictional semantics. It means that fictional existence is not confined to the polarity of actual existence ("to be or not to be"). To exist fictionally
means to exist in different modes, ranks, and degrees. This is one of the
main principles of our semantics of fictionality and finalizes its divorce from the mimetic doctrine. _We are now able to account not
only for fictional entities whose mode of existence is analogous to
that of actual entities but also for the many and diverse fictional existents that are pecwiarly different from them.
147

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

This book does not investigate the intensional function of authentication and the corresponding modes of fictional existence in all
their diversity. But a look at the basic cases gives us a sufficient understanding of this remarkable mechanism of fiction making.

2. Dyadic Authentication

The basic and most common narrative texture combines two
kinds of discourse: the narrative of an anonymous, impersonal narrator and the direct speech of the fictional person(s). The resulting texture has an easily observable global regularity: passages of third-person (Er-form) narrative alternate with the persons' dialogues and
monologues. The segments are clearly distinguished and sharply demarcated by formal, semantic, and pragmatic (indexical) distinctive
features (for details, see Dolezel 1973, 8-9, 16, 20-40).
An instructive example of the dyadic texture is the narrative of
Don Quixote's famous encounter with the windmills (in chap. 8 of
Don Quixote):
At that moment, they made out thirty or forty windmills, such as
they have in that part of the country, and as soon as Don Quixote
saw them, he said to his squire:
"Fortune is guiding our affairs better than we could have desired; for you see there, friend Sancho Panza, thirty or more lawless giants rise up with whom I mean to do battle.... "
"What giants?" said Sancho Panza.
"Those you see there," replied his master, "with the long arms,
some of them nearly two leagues long."
"But look, Your Grace," replied Sancho, "those things that appear there are not giants, but windmills, and what seem to be arms
are their vanes which, turned by the wind, make the millstone go."
(170; 58-59)

The passage forces upon us the question: What exists in the fictional
world of Don Quixote--windmills or giants? Our answer is the same
as that of any ordinary reader of the novel: windmills. Clearly, the decision is not based on truth-valuation, because there are neither

Authentication
windmills nor giants in the world until the text tells us about them.7
The decision is based on the character of the constructing texture:
the windmills are introduced in the narrator's discourse, the giants in
that of a fictional person. A general rule defines the character of the
dyadic authentication function: entities introduced in the discourse
of the anonymous third-person narrator are eo ipso authenticated as
fictional facts, while those introduced in the discourse of the fictional
persons are not. From now on, we use the term authoritative narrative to designate this primary source of fictional facts. 8
Where does the narrative's authentication authority originate? It
has the same grounding as any other performative authority-convention. In the actual world, this authority is given by social, mostly
institutional, systems; in fiction, it is inscribed in the norms of the
narrative genre. Let us note that all discourse features of the authoritative narrative are negative: it lacks truth-value, identifiable subjective source (it is "anonymous"), and spatiotemporal situation (the
speech act is contextless). This anulling of all the typical features of
natural discourse is a precondition for the performative force to work
automatically. If this negativity reminds the reader of "God's word,"
so be it. It is precisely the divine world-creating word that provides
the model for the authoritative narrative and its performative force.
Paradoxically, authoritative narrative is a prisoner of its authentication force: it cannot lie or err. Telling examples are authorial errors,
haphazard, usually trivial, often concerning the dating of fictional
events. Thus, for example, in Trollope's Phineas Redux (1874) we read:
"Early in August he [Finn] went over to England ... and made his
first visit to Tankerville" (n). But a few pages later: "In September
Finn was back in Ireland, and about the end of that month he made
his first visit to Tankerville" (14). Prince's acute observation supports
this understanding of inconsistencies in the authoritative narrative.
The incompatible dating of events in the authoritative-cum-dramatic
narrative of Roger Martin du Gard's jean Baro is are "authorial oversights." But in the !ch-form "cahiers" ofJean-Paul Sartre's La Nausee,
they "underline his [the protagonist's] utter detachment from the
past and his sense ofloss in a shapeless present" (Prince 1983, 60-61).9
149

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

Fictional facts constructed by authoritative narrative constitute
the factual domain, the nonauthenticated possibles introduced in
the characters' discourse-the virtual domain of the fictional world.
The virtuals pose a double challenge to the theory of authentication.
The second, less important, is easier to explain and, therefore, I shall
face it first. As we know from the passage quoted from Don Quixote,
the two fictional persons on the scene, Don Quixote and Sancho
Panza, express contradictory opinions about the objects in the fields.
We ask, quite naturally; who is right and who is wrong? Because the
fictional fact had been established, the answer is at hand: Sancho is
right, his master wrong. In justifying this answer, Mardnez-Bonati
formulates a rule for valuating statements of fictional persons: "The
statements of novelistic personages, which agree with those of the
narrator, are necessarily true, while those which deviate from them
are necessarily false" (1973, 186). I concur with Martfnez-Bonati that
statements of fictional persons can be assigned truth-values. However, possible-worlds semantics enables us to formulate more precisely their truth-condition: it is not agreement with the narrator's
statements but rather correspondence to fictional facts. Needless to
say, fictional persons can be right or wrong only about the facts of
their fictional world.
The first, more difficult problem with the virtuals introduced in
the fictional persons' discourse is this: can they become fictional facts,
and if so, how? The question is tantamount to asking whether in the
dyadic function fictional persons possess some degree of authentication authority. The answer is positive in principle, but we must add
immediately that this authority depends on strict conditions, three of
which seem to be necessary: first, the speaker has to be trustworthy
("reliable"); second, there has to be consensus among the persons of
the world with respect to the entity in question; third, the virtual
must never be disauthenticated in the authoritative narrative. If these
conditions are met, the virtual becomes a fictional fact.
We conclude then, that the speech acts of fictional persons in the
binary type have, potentially, a performative force, but its origin is
different from that of the authoritative narrative. The narrator's au-

Authentication
thority, let us repeat, is given by genre convention and is analogous to
Austin's performative authority; the fictional persons' authority rests
on consensus and coherence and is analogous to the pragmatic conditions of natural discourse. 10 It is incorrect to deny the existence of
authoritative narrative by claiming that such a discourse is not natural. But it is equally incorrect to lead the campaign against anthropomorphizing fiction so far as to deny analogies in the pragmatic
conditions between fictional and actual persons' discourse. Fictional
witnesses are no less convincing than actual witnesses if their accounts cohere and are accepted by other inhabitants of their worlds.
The two different origins of fictional facts in the dyadic authentication leave an intensional trace, which splits the factual domain of
the fictional world into two subdomains: fully authenticated, by authoritative narrative, and collectively authenticated, by consensual
fictional persons' accounts.1 1 As to the virtual domain, the domain of
possibles that remain nonauthentic, it divides into private domains,
the beliefs, visions, illusions, and errors of individual fictional persons
(Don Quixote's giants, Emma Bovary's Paris).
The private domains are the main but not the sole constituents of
the virtual in fictional worlds. Two recent studies have pointed out
narrative strategies that enhance the virtual domain. The first strategy, identified by Prince, is the disnarrated, defined as "all the events
that do not happen though they could have and are nonetheless referred to (in a negative or hypothetical mode) by the narrative text."
In other words, a possible event or state is posited (either in the narrative or in a fictional person's speech act) but then negated: "This
bed could have been covered with roses, but it was not" (1992, 30, 33).
Another narrative strategy of this kind, hypothetical focalization, has
been described by David Herman. It assigns the construction of virtuals-possible or counterfactual alternatives to fictional facts-to a
hypothetical, fictionally nonexistent observer (witness): "Mweta was
smaller and more animated than Bray, and seen from the distance of
the house, as they got further away their progress would have been a
sort of dance" (1994a, 242).
The seemingly simple intensional distinction of factual and virtual

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

domains gives the fictional world a remarkable ontological depth.
Ryan was the first to notice this feature: "The private worlds of characters generate mutually incompatible courses of events," among
which the actualized plot charts its path. She suggested that the
world's ontological depth is "the basic condition of tellability.... The
aesthetic appeal of a plot is a function of the richness and variety of
the domain of the virtual" (1991, 156). Exploring the world's ontological depth, we advance from semantics to aesthetics of fictional
worlds.

3. Graded Authentication
The authoritative narrative has been with us since the beginnings
of fiction making. But equally ancient is a subjective mode that
adopts the fictional person's discourse for world construction. This
narrative mode is commonly known as personal Ich-form. More recently, the Ich-form has been joined by subjectivized Er-form, a narrative mode formed when features of subjectivity penetrate in a
lesser or higher degree into the third-person texture. In modern literature, both of these subjective modes of narrative have been cultivated with unprecedented intensity and diversity. 12 A theory of authentication has to explain their authentication authority and force.
The authentication force of subjective narrative modes cannot be
explained by a two-value function. We have to introduce a generalized, graded authentication function that can express formally the
world-constructing force of all available narrative modes. The function assigns different grades (degrees) of authenticity to fictional entities, distributed along a scale between "fully authentic" and "nonauthentic." Consequently, it provides world constituents with different
ranks or modes of fictional existence. 13 The graded authentication
function is truly the key to understanding the intensional nature of
fictional existence. Let us describe its operation in the two subjective
narrative modes presented above.
J.I. Subjectivized Er-form. This narrative mode can be roughly
characterized as a mixed texture, blending formal features of the

Authentication
third-person narrative with semantic and indexical features of fictional persons' discourse (Dolezel 1973, 50-55); the markers of subjectivity accumulate in a higher or lesser "dosage." The conventional
authentication force is weakened but not voided: it is sustained by
the texture's grammatical features, shared with the authoritative narrative. Subjectivized Er-form constructs fictional facts relativized to a
certain person (or group of persons), facts commingled with subjective attitudes, beliefs, assumptions, emotions, and so on. Domains
emerge in the fictional world, which are "tinted" by a subjective bias
but are semantically different from the private virtual domains. Narrative texts that incorporate subjectivized Er-form support a threevalue authentication function where a new value-"relatively authentic"-joins the values "authentic" and "nonauthentic." This kind
of authentication creates a transitional zone of relative fictional facts
between the factual and the virtual domains. 14
The fictional world of Madame Bovary, constructed by the fluctuating Flaubertian texture, 15 is shaped in this pattern. Its core is constituted by a fully authenticated, factual domain constructed by authoritative narrative: "When they leftTostes, in the month of March,
Madame Bovary was pregnant" (90; 81). However, if we read, for example, the portrayal of Charges Bovary, we perceive clearly the presence of a subjective attitude (Emma's) in the narrative texture:
"Charles's conversation was as flat as a sidewalk, where everyone's
ideas filed past, in their ordinary dress, arousing neither emotions nor
laughter, nor reverie .... He couldn't swim, or fence, or fire a pistol,
and once he couldn't even explain to her a term about horseback riding she had come across in a novel" (59; 54). This is Emma's Charles,
his properties and deficiencies perceived by her critical eye. At the
same time, however, this porrrayal cannot be taken as a purely subjective, nonauthentic construct; it is given a degree of authenticity by
being introduced within the Er-form narrative. Charles's character is
part of the relatively factual domain of the fictional world. We are not
surprised to find a confirmation of this character in his acting.
The existential status of relative fictional facts can best be judged
in contrast with virtuals projected by a fictional person. Here is what

153

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

Rodolphe has to say about his existence:. "Yes! I missed out on so
many things! Always alone! If only I had had a goal in my life, if I'd
met with some affection, found someone-Oh, how I would have
applied all the energy, I am capable 0£ I would have overcome everything, smashed down every obstacle!" (171; 152). This is Rodolphe
"par lui-meme," sentimental claptrap intended to seduce Emma, an
outright lie. How do we know? Because the authoritative narrative
has constructed the fictional facts about Rodolphe: "M. Rodolphe
Boulanger was thirty-four years old. He was coarse in nature and
sharp in intelligence, with much experience and understanding of
women. This one [Emma] seemed pretty to him .... But the encumbrances of the pleasure, looked at in perspective, made him
think, by contrast, of his mistress. She was an actress from Rouen,
whom he was keeping" (r6r; 143).
3.2. Personal Ich-form. First-person (Ich-form) narrative, in all
its variants, 16 is identical with fictional persons' direct discourse in the
formal, semantic, and indexical features. If we treated it in terms of
the two-value function, we would have to conclude that the Ich-form
narrator has no conventional authentication authority and, consequently, no force to construct a fictional world. Yet it is easy to see
that the Ich-narrator has a privileged position within the set of fictional persons: he or she alone is given a double speech activity, participating in dialogues with other fictional persons and producing a
monologic narrative. The first kind of speech activity is part of the
agential participation in the fictional world, the second serves the
world-constructing function.
In order to be accepted as a source of fictional facts, the /ch-narrator has to prove his or her competence. We can say, somewhat
metaphorically, that while the authoritative narrator received the authentication authority by fiat, the Ich-narrator must earn it. Yet whatever the narrator's effort, the fictional world of the Ich-form narrative
will never lose the intentional trace of its subjective origin. To exist in
this world is to exist as a more-or-less confirmed virtual. Necessarily,
this narrative challenges the reader to a more participatory role in the
reconstruction of the fictional world.
154

Authentication
The main ingredient of the Ich-narrator's competence is privileged
knowledge. To assert and maintain this privilege, the narrator resorts
to two main devices: delimiting the scope of this knowledge and
identifying its sources. The limits of the Ich-narrator's cognitive range
can be set negatively, by an explicit refusal to introduce fictional entities that are unknown to him or her. This device is employed by the
protagonist-narrator of Benjamin Constant's Adolphe: "I never knew
how this liaison came about. When I first saw Ellenore, it had existed
for a long time and had been, as it were, sanctioned" (23; 59). The
quote refers to the beginning of the liaison between Ellenore and the
count, an event that lies outside the narrator's direct experience. Of
course, the narrator could remain silent about this event, as he remains silent about many others. By explicitly stating his ignorance,
he displays his scrupulousness and thus stakes out the domain of his
authentication authority.
The majority of fictional facts constructed by the first-person narrator of Adolphe are personal experiences: "On leaving Gottingen, I
went to the little town D***" (18; 51). If the fictional fact is outside
the narrator's experience, its source is meticulously specified. One of
the basic problems facing the Ich-form narrator is the inaccessibility
of mental states of other fictional persons. Constant employs frequently the well-known device of reading off the hidden states of the
other mind from observable physical symptoms-facial traits, eye
expressions, tone of voice: "I discerned in Ellenore's features a feeling
of discontent and sadness" (34; 76). When the narrator was absent
from the scene of a fictional event, the accounts of witnesses are used.
Ellenore's servants report on the events of the fateful night when she
falls sick after Baron T. passed on to her Adolphe's private letter. All
these devices-direct experience, reading-off, reports of witnessesserve the same function: to make the narrative act reliable and thus
warrant within a delimited scope of knowledge the authentication
authority of the Ich-narrator.
In the type of Ich-form represented by Adolphe the narrator controls the introduction of fictional entities so tightly that the virtual
domains of other fictional persons cannot develop. No interior
155

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

monologues other than the narrator's are possible. The only source of
introducing virtual entities are the utterances of fictional persons
themselves, expressed in dialogues with the narrator or in those that
the narrator attends or overhears. The fictional world ofAdolphe is an
egocentric structure; its core is the factual domain of the narrator's
experience, while the virtual domains of other characters are minimized.
Many traditional Ich-forms, including Adolphe, reinforce the narrator's authority by adopting a genre of natural (nonliterary) discourse: letter, journal, diary, memoir, manuscript, often published
posthumously by a serendipitous "editor." I refer to this type as natural Ich-form. In modern literature, purely literary (nonnatural) Ichform appears, which proves that the mode has become conventionalized. The narrative remains formally in the first person but is lifted
from the semantic and pragmatic restrictions of subjective discourse.17 Consequently, the narrative usurps the convention-based
authentication authority. The author writes a most unnatural text: a
first-person discourse with the semantic features and the performative force of the authoritative Er-form.
Genette observed the rise of this species of Ich-form in Marcel
Proust's A la Recherche du temps perdu. Indeed, that novel is an important stage in this remarkable process. The initial step away from
the model of natural discourse is the abandonment of the space-time
anchoring of the narrative act: the writing of a multivolume work is
"instantaneous, without temporal dimension" (Genette 1972, 234).
Almost imperceptibly, the conventionalized Ich-form emerges in the
'TAmour de Swann'' section of Du Cote de chez Swann. The presence
of the Ich-narrator is affirmed by occasional phrases and utterances,
such as "my grandfather" [mon grandpere] and "such as I had at
Combray in my childhood" [comme j'eus a Combray dans mon enfance] (see Genette 1972, 250). However, the introduction of fictional
facts is not at all restricted to the narrator's cognitive scope. The Ichnarrator appropriates the "omniscient" posture of authoritative narrative, constructing all details of Swann's actions, motivations, and
feelings. Proust's "I.;Amour de Swann'' creates authoritative narrative

Authentication

in the guise of Ich-form and thus redefines the authentication principles of narrative modes. 18 No longer restricted by the subjectivity of
its source, the nonnatural Ich-form is a victory of convention over
imitation.
The clash within the Ich-form between the conditions of natural
discourse and the conventional authentication force is radically
exposed in Nigel Williams' novel Star Turn (1985). The novel has
been given as an example of a story told by "a self-confessed liar"
(Hutcheon 1988, n8). This is certainly correct, but it does not give a
full account of the narrator's performance. We should notice that the
narrator tells two different kinds of lies. First, as a fictional person he
tells the natural-discourse lies throughout his life and, particularly, as
a propagandist for the Ministry oflnformation during World War II.
But this discourse is merely a contrastive background for the unreliable discourse praxis of the narrator, the writing of an autobiography.
At the very beginning of his narrative the narrator admits, ''I am
aware that my imagination supplements my memory to an unhealthy
extent. Which is why, to some ungenerous-minded people, I might
seem a little less than reliable when talking about the past. And yet I
wish to do so" (n). He continues to reflect on the genre, purpose, and
truth-conditions of his autobiographical writing and on truth, untruth, and fiction in general. His comments are complemented by his
friend and first reader, Alan, who reminds him early in the game that
he cannot tell "the difference between fact and fiction'' (60).
But is the narrator's unreliability relevant for his authentication
authority? Let us first emphasize that the reader cannot accept the
narrator's offer to treat the text as either an autobiography or a novel.
Star Turn is a fictional text governed by the conventions of fictionalworld construction rather than by the truth-conditions of autobiographical writing. It makes sense to ask whether an autobiographer
tells the truth or lies, but the question is out of place with respect to
a fictionalist's narrative act (Pf.3). In fictional writing there is no life
before the life story. Whatever the realemes behind the author's text,
the narrator of Star Turn transforms actual events, persons, words,
places, and so on into entities of a fictional world. The fiction is only
157

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

presented as autobiography, in the same way as epistolary novels are
presented as letters. The narrator's credentials as autobiographer (or
lack thereof) have ultimately no relevance for the authentication
force of his narrative. Star Turn should be judged not by the criteria
of autobiography but by the conventions of fictional writing.
To be sure, the peculiar writing praxis of the narrator determines
the character and shape of the novel's fictional world. Star Turn constructs a history (the first and second world wars, the general strike of
1926) and historical personalities (Proust, Virginia Woolf, Freud,
Churchill, Goebbels, Oswald Mosely, and others) strikingly different
from commonly known historical facts. These free, imaginative
transformations create an absurd, carnivalesque, and politically aggressive fictional history, of the same kind as that of Hasek's The
Good Soldier Svejk (V.3.2) or, to take a truly parallel example, of
Thomas Pynchon's Gravity's Rainbow (1973). Yet the carnivalization of
history can be written and read only against the background of historical facts. Ultimately, Williams' narrator knows the difference between lies and truth and the price to be paid for confusing them:
"Things happen. Whether they happened or not can be tested and
discovered. To abandon that hope is to abandon hope in any kind of
justice or decency'' (307).
Williams' narrative strategy throws light on a significant aspect of
Ich-form narratives. All Ich-form narrators are self-constructed as fictional persons. But their properties, attitudes, habits-that is, their
personal credentials-are just one factor in their narrative competence. The other is the force of authentication that is given to the Ichform narrators thanks to their function. Martinez-Bonati, speaking
about "wrong-minded narrators," maintains: "Their unreliability as
persons ... does not compromise their structural reliability as basic
narrators" (1981, n5). Furthermore, as Rimmon-Kenan has observed,
"many texts make it difficult to decide whether the narrator is reliable
or unreliable, and if reliable-to what extent." She quotes the paradigm example of Henry James's The Turn ofthe Screw: the governess
"can be seen as a reliable narrator telling the story of two haunted chil-

Authentication
dren, but she can also be considered an unreliable, neurotic narrator,
unwittingly reporting her own hallucinations" (1983, 103).
We can now see that the Ich-form demonstrates the victory of
convention over imitation in many different ways. The most radical
demonstration is provided by "text after death." I suggest this term
for such narratives where the lch-narrator narrates his or her own
death. The short novel of the Czech writer Bohumil Hrabal, Closely
Watched Trains (popularized by a film of the same tide), is such a
text. 19 I quote from its conclusion:
And then there was a detonation. And I ... lying next to the German soldier, stretched out my hand and opened his stiffening
palm and put in it the green four-leaf clover that brings good luck.
... I heard the air pressure rush through the landscape and hiss
and whistle on the bare branches of trees and bushes ... but I was
choking and blood was gushing out of me. Until the last moment,
before I began to lose sight of myself, I was clasping the dead
man's hand. (85)
Here we have reached the limits of narrating. Text after death is more
than nonnatural, it is the product of a physically impossible act-of
posthumous writing. Yet the text is accepted by readers as a medium
of world construction. It reconfirms emphatically the fact that literary acts are not restricted to the acts of actual speaking and writing.
The circle of narrative modes is thus closed. It begins at the nonnatural authoritative Er-form, passes through the simulation of the
natural discourse genres, and ends with the nonnatural authoritative
Ich-form. The two basic and most popular narrative modes, which
despite their formal difference share the same conventional authentication authority, are purely literary, nonnatural discourses. I have
posited that fictional texts do not submit to the truth-conditions of
the imaging text (Pq). Nor are they bound by the pragmatic conditions of natural texts, as has just been demonstrated.

159

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

4. Subverting Authentication
Reaching the limits of narrating (of the narrative act) does not
mean that we have reached the limits of the narratable. The narratable transcends the realm of the possible and encompasses the logically impossible. The concept of (logically) impossible worlds has
cropped up here and there in this book (Pr.2.2, V.2.1). Now is the
time to look at it more closely, because the construction of impossible worlds is part and parcel of a more general anomaly of fiction
making, the misuse of authentication.
4.1. Self-voiding narratives. Every narrative mode discussed in
the preceding sections possesses a certain degree of authentication
force, in some cases conferred purely by convention, in others by a
combination of convention and the narrator's credentials. Each of
these narrative modes has the capacity to affirm fictional facts, although the character of fictional existence is different for the different modes. Fictional existence, let us recall, is an intensional phenomenon. But if fictional existence depends on the authenticating
force of texture, then it is at the mercy of this force. If the texture's
authenticating force is null and void, then possibles cannot become
fictional facts.
It is well known that literature will miss no opportunity to subvert
its own foundations. Authentication force has been challenged and
ultimately, in modernist and postmodernist fiction, repealed. This
"erasure" is one of the most fascinating events in the evolution of literary narrative. It confirms that in the "language game" called literature, violation of norms and conventions is not a destructive but a
productive process, a discovery of new ways of meaning production.
Let us explain the voiding of the authentication force and its consequences by returning to its performative nature. We know that the
performative is valid only if its felicity conditions are met. If a breach
of any of these conditions occurs, the act is null and void: no change
in the world will be brought about. If I tell you, "You are sentenced
to death," you will just laugh, because I have no authority to pass this
(or any other) sentence. There is yet another, more subtle, "unhappi-

160

Authentication

ness" of the performative-when it is issued "insincerely." "If I say 'I
promise to ... ' without in the least intending to carry out the
promised action, perhaps even not believing that it is in my power to
carry it out, the promise is hollow" (Austin 1971, 14). Let us call this
second "abuse" self-voiding. Self-voiding deprives the performative of
its illocutionary force, just as the breach of felicity conditions does.
Self-voiding is at the core of fictional experiments that cultivate
failure of authentication. Let me single out two narrative modes where
the authenticating act is abused by not being performed "seriously'':
a. In skaz-narrative the authentication force is undermined by
irony. Skaz is a ludic narrative act, a noncommittal, nonbinding play
with world construction. 20 In the well-known examples of the Russian skaz, N. V. Gogol's stories "The Overcoat" and "The Nose," the
narrative texture moves freely and arbitrarily from the Er-form to the
!ch-form, from a lofty, bookish style to colloquial language, from the
"omniscient" to the "limited knowledge" posture. The last feature is
especially important for the authentication force of skaz. There is an
"omniscient" authoritative source in "The Overcoat," which freely
constructs states and events of the hero's mental life. So, for example,
when Akakij Akakijevic ascends the staircase leading to his tailor's
workshop, he "was already speculating how much Petrovic would ask
and in his mind [myslenno] resolved to pay no more than two
rubles"(542; 232). Akakij's interior monologues are constructed in detail, in a laconic, fragmented style typical of this person: "This is a
business, this is," he said to himself, "and to think it should turn out
this way." Then, after a short silence, he added: "So that's how it is!
... " This was followed by another silence, a long one, after which he
pronounced: "Well there! Who would have now ... what a ... sort
of ... that is ... what a turn of events!" (545; 235).
Yet suddenly we are faced with a twist: when Akakij sees in a shop
window a (French) picture of a seductive woman, the narrator suggests three possible mental reactions but authenticates none of them
because: "it is impossible to creep into a man's soul [zalezt' v dusu
celoveka] and find out everything he is thinking" (552, 241). Such a

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

statement is in contradiction to the narrator's previous practice and
raises fundamental doubts about his seriousness and, consequently,
about his authentication authority.
Ironic voiding of the conventional procedures of authentication is
especially palpable in the conclusion of "The Nose." Commenting
on the fictional world that he constructed, the narrator declares his
lack of understanding, not only of its fantastic elements but also of
the reasons why any author would write such a story. "No, I do not
understand it at all [resitel'no ne ponimaju]! But stranger still, and
the most incomprehensible of all is, how authors can take up such
plots. I confess it's altogether unfathomable, it's like ... no, no, I just
do not understand [sovsem ne ponimaju]" (483, 171). The final paragraphs of "The Nose" give away the secret of the Gogolian skaz: it is
a pleasurable game of pure storytelling that leaves a fictional world
whose existence is, literally, a question.
b. In self-disclosing narrative-commonly known as metafiction-the authenticating act is voided by being "laid bare." Fictionmaking procedures are overtly exposed. Self-disclosing narrative is
the most telling instance of literature's power to generate new sense
by flaunting its hidden, conventional foundations. In the paradigmatic case of metafiction the text simultaneously constructs a fictional world and the story of this construction: "Metafictional novels
tend to be constructed on the principle of a fundamental and sustained opposition: the construction of a fictional illusion (as in traditional realism) and the laying bare of that illusion. In other words,
the lowest common denominator of metafiction is simultaneously to
create a fiction and to make a statement about the creation of that
fiction" (Waugh 1984, 6). Postmodernist metafiction (the "nouveau
roman," Vladimir Nabokov, Witold Gombrowicz, John Barth, John
Fowles, and many others) lays bare not only the world-creating act
but all acts and activities of literary communication-reading, interpreting, commenting, criticism, intertextuality (see Hutcheon 1980;
Christensen 1981; Brooke-Rose 1981, 464-89; McHale 1987, 112-30,
197-215; Krysinski 1988; Pier 1992; Paterson 1994, 26-39).
The performative act of skaz and metafiction has no authentica-

Authentication

tion force; fictional worlds projected by self-voiding and self-disclosing
narratives lack authenticity. On the one hand, possibles seem to be
brought into fictional existence, since a standard narrative text is
written; on the other hand, fictional existence is not achieved, because the text's authentication force is nullified. We have no satisfactory metalanguage for describing the semantic status of narrative
worlds lacking authenticity: our thinking and our language are dominated by binary oppositions. Literary narratives proposing worlds
without authenticity reveal the limitations of this binarism; they use
and abuse the world-constructing force to question the universality
and validity of our metalinguistic dichotomies. 21 Self-voiding narratives simulate narrative texture but cannot bestow fictional existence,
cannot affirm fictional facts. They subvert the very foundations of fiction making and create constructs suspended between fictional existence and nonexistence.
4.2. Impossible worlds. The voiding of the authentication force
of the narrative texture is the result of violations of the pragmatic (felicity) conditions of the performative speech act. However, the collapse of authentication can also be brought about by a semantic strategy, by introducing contradictions into the fictional world. An
impossible world in the strict logical sense emerges (Pr.2.2; see also
VII.3; Ep.4). How is this feat of imagination achieved, and what is
the price paid for it?
Let me start with a brief consideration of 0. Henry's story "Roads
of Destiny." The text's authoritative narrative constructs a world in
which the protagonist dies three times in three different ways. Obviously, according to our theory of authentication, all three conflicting
versions of his demise are fully authentic. Juxtaposed, unreconciled,
unexplained, they form an impossible world. Since they cannot coexist, none of them exists. The logical structure of the impossible
world denies fictional existence to possible entities. Literature has the
means for constructing impossible worlds, but at the price of frustrating the whole enterprise: an impossible world cannot be called
into fictional existence. The Leibnizian restriction is circumvented
but not lifted.

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

In twentieth-century fiction the technique of alternative developments of the story was popularized by Jorge Borges in "The Garden
of Forking Paths" (1941), a description of an imaginary "classical"
Chinese novel that constructs all the possible branchings of a story
line. 22 Borges' text is a model of an infinite generation of fictional
worlds. Paradoxically, this hubris of fiction making leads into the trap
of a vast impossible world, where mutually contradictory stories cancel out each other. In Robbe-Grillet's La Maison de rendez-vous the
authoritative narrative constructs contradictions of several different
orders: (1) one arid the same event is introduced in several conflicting
versions; (2) a place (Hong-Kong) is and is not the setting of the
novel; (3) the same events are ordered in reversed temporal sequence
(A precedes B, B precedes A); and (4) one and the same world entity
recurs in several modes of existence-as a literary fictional fact, as a
theater performance, as a sculpture, as a painting. 23 This last kind of
contradiction is especially important for understanding the structuring
of impossible fictional worlds. The entities are of different ontological
orders; they are brought together by metalepsis, by erasing ontological
boundaries (Genette 1972, 245; 1983, 58; see also Brooke-Rose 1981,
333-35; McHale 1987, 120). Robbe-Grillet's construct is a collection of
fictional-world fragments that cannot coexist.
Robbe-Grillet's narrative puts the structure of the impossible fictional world on display: it is a superimposition of contradictory, irreconcilable alternatives, all of them fully authenticated but none of
them a fictional existent. A similar observation has been made by
philosophers: the situation in "inconsistent worlds" is "something
like a over-printing of discordant pictures or a text designed to equivocate between divergent claims. (It is as though there were superimposed realities, as with the conflation or superposition of distinct action-patterns on a television screen.) ... This can be thought of as
taking a number of individually and separately altogether self-consistent worlds, and ramming them together into a composite superimposition" (Rescher and Brandom 1980, 6). The philosophers use this
analogy as an argument against the term impossible worlds: "One
should avoid speaking of inconsistent worlds as impossible worlds.

Authentication
... Inconsistent object and worlds ... are feasible targets of rational
consideration and scrutiny. They too can be meaningfully assumed,
supposed, hypothesized, etc. And the supposition of such worlds is
emphatically not an invitation to logical chaos. One can reason perfectly cogently and coherently about them" (1980, 4). Indeed, one
can, and therefore the distinction between "impossible" and "inconsistent" worlds is spurious. I agree with Lycan, who perceived that semantics "needs" the concept of impossible world, once it accepts the
concept of possible world (1994, 39-41).
Fictional narrative confirms that impossible worlds can be "supposed" and reasoned about, just as "round square" can be uttered
(written) and cogitated. Eco expresses this potential of language by
stating that impossible worlds can be "mentioned": "We cannot conceive of worlds furnished with square circles that can be bought for
an amount of dollars corresponding to the highest even number.
However ... such a world can be mentioned" because "language can
name nonexistent and inconceivable entities" (1990, 76; 1994, 81-83).
The fact that we can "mention" such worlds does not change their
logical structure: they are outside the realm of the possible. If we inspect more closely the status of entities in impossible worlds, we find
that they strongly resemble nonexistents. Let us recall that nonexistent entities, such as the present king of France, have no properties;
but nonexistents can be mentioned; we can make statements about
them even though all these statements are false (Pr.I.I). The writing
of impossible worlds is, semantically, a step backward in fiction making; it voids the transformation of nonexistent possibles into fictional
entities and thus cancels the entire world-making project. However,
literature turns the ruin of its own enterprise into a new achievement:
in designing impossible worlds, it poses a challenge to the imagination no less intriguing than squaring the circle.
But we have to return once more to La Maison de rendez-vous. We
notice that its impossible logicosemantic structure is brought about
by an act that flouts the pragmatic conditions of fictional-world construction. The narrative act is tentative, unfinished, crumbling into a
series of frustrated attempts. The resulting texture of the novel is a se-

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

quence of drafts, with cuts, new beginnings, corrections, deletions,
and additions. 24 La Maison de rendez-vous is a self-disclosing narrative
of a most radical type: an overt demonstration of fiction writing as a
trial-and-error activity. It thus reveals the close association between
the logicosemantic and the pragmatic transgressions of the conventions of fiction making: self-disclosing narrative creates an impossible
fictional world. Is this a universal principle in the ruin of fiction making? Should we conclude that the fictional worlds of metafiction are
necessarily impossible?
Surely, the project of metafiction is to create impossible worlds, to
bring about the impossible coexistence of ontologically heterogeneous persons-the actual participants of fictional communication
and the fictional artifacts constructed and reconstructed in this communication. In other words, metafiction is a case of metalepsis. 25 Yet
how does the metafictional project fare in practice? I tackle this question by investigating one of the most radical instances of metafiction,
Italo Calvino's Ifon a W'inters Night a Traveller (1979). There are two
main reasons to call this text a radical experiment in metafiction.
First, as Nella Cotrupi has pointed out, Calvino's novel, in addition
to the standard double-layered structure of metafiction, constructs a
third layer, "the fictionalization of the theories and discourse of
metafiction itself.. Calvino's text may be seen, therefore, to raise the
novel not just to the second degree, that of metafiction, but to a third
degree, to what we may call the degree of hypermetafiction'' (1991,
281). 26 Second, Calvino's test is a series of discontinuous narrative
fragments. The individual fragments posit po~sible alternatives but
leave them unreconciled, nonauthenticated in a gesture of bifurcation typical of impossible-world construction: "My hand might not
hold a briefcase, swollen and a bit worn, but might be pushing a
square suitcase of plastic material supplied with little wheels, guided
by a chrome stick that can be folded up" (12). In the microstructure
of this scene the "forking-paths" macrostructure of the novel is reflected: the opening of several incompatible alternatives, the launching of many different stories leading nowhere. All the incompatible

166

Authentication
fragments are equally authentic, which means that all of them are
nonauthentic.
In a typical metafictional turn, Calvino constructs the story of the
author and the reader(s). Yet this experiment leads to a paradoxical
result: it demonstrates quite clearly that the coexistence of the actual
author and readers with fictional characters is impossible. The demonstration is especially telling in the case of the reader. The beginning
of the novel is a traditional allocution of a universal actual reader, a
discourse akin to an essay on how and what to read, except that the
book just read by this reader is Calvino's Ifon a W'inters Night a Traveller. The text preserves its essayistic character when the allocution
shifts to an actual reader-type, "the sort of person who, on principle,
no longer expects anything of anything" (4). In the next step, but still
within the same discourse genre, Calvino descends from the level of
reader-type to possible individual readers, those reading on a bus, in
a car, at the office desk, at home. These individuals are still posited as
actual readers existing outside the fictional world.27
Yet when the process of individuation reaches its last stage, picking from the set of possible readers a particular reader, the reader
crosses from the actual into the fictional world, becomes a fullfledged fictional person. Now the text turns from the essayistic to the
fictional type (note the reader's conversations and interactions with
the fictional bookseller and "the Other Reader") and constructs a new
"possible story" (32), located fully in the fictional world. 28 As the
reader joins the agential constellation of the fictional persons, so his
story joins the set of the ten story fragments the actual reader reads.
The fictionalization of the author is no less important for
Calvino's deconstruction of the metafictional technique (see Segre
1979) but is achieved in a different, though no less ingenious, way.
Three fictional authors appear in the novel's fictional world. The first
one is a fictional counterpart of the actual ltalo Calvino, the transworld identity being ensured by the rigid designator of the proper
name. Second, the actual ltalo Calvino has another counterpart in
the fictional world, the fictional writer Silas Flannery. We can claim

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

that "Silas Flannery" is an alias of "Italo Calvino" (see Pr.2.1; see also
Ep.4), because the transworld identity of the actual and the fictional
writer is established by the identity of roles. Flannery had "the idea of
writing a novel composed only of beginnings of novels. The protagonist could be a Reader who is continually interrupted" (197). Finally,
the fictional Calvino and Flannery are joined by a fictional "anti-author," the translator and counterfeiter Marana, whose machinations
and adventures frustrate the enterprise of writing and complicate the
story of reading the novel Ifon a W'inters Night a Traveller. 29
The impossible blending of actual persons (author, reader) and
fictional persons, which seemed to be the constitutive feature of
metafiction, cannot be sustained in world-constructing practice: the
author and the reader are absorbed into the fictional world, are reconstructed as fictional counterparts, and the ontological contradiction disappears (see also Segre 1979; McHale 1987, 197-98, 215). The
stories of the authors and the readers become strains in the "forkingpaths" structure. But this is, literally, just one part of the story. The
other is that the denied metalepsis leaves a divide within the fictional
world. The basic characteristic of metafiction, the two-layered structure of its fictional world, remains intact. The fictional auth.or is assigned a particular, exclusive activity, different from the actions of
other fictional persons-writing the novel If on a W'inters Night a
Traveller. Similarly, the erotic story of the fictional readers does not
erase the story of reading. Calvino's reader is a picaro, except that his
or her role is to string together not stories of adventure but adventures of reading. Today's picaro does not have to leave the armchair or
the bed to visit many exotic places and times and to experience many
exciting adventures. To be transported literally into a fictional world,
the reader has to send there a counterpart; but to be transported there
figuratively, he or she just has to find the right book to read.

168

I

CHAPTER VII

(TE)

Saturation

A necessary consequence of the fact that fictional worlds are human
constructs is their incompleteness (Pr.2.4). It would take a text of infinite length to construct a complete fictional world. Finite texts, the
only texts that humans are capable of producing, are bound to create
incomplete worlds. For this reason, incompleteness is a universal extensional property of the fictional-world structuring. 1 But we should
recognize that the fictional text's texture manipulates incompleteness
in many different ways and degrees, determining the world's saturation. We arrive at an important distinction, up to now unnoticed in
fictional semantics, between the extensional property of world incompleteness and the intensional property of world saturation.

r. Facts and Gaps
The texture of a fictional text is the result of the choices the author
makes when writing the text. When the author produces an explicit
texture, he or she constructs a fictional fact (provided that the felicity
conditions of authentication are satisfied). If no texture is written
(zero texture), a gap arises in the fictional-world structure. Gaps, let
us repeat, are a necessary and universal feature of fictional worlds. Yet

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

particular fictional texts vary the number, the extent, and the functions of the gaps by varying the distribution of zero texture. This variability has been noted in literary semantics. Thus, for instance, I have
indicated (Dolezel 1980) how the radically incomplete physique of
the romantic hero serves the stylistic aims of romantic narrative: a
physical detail surrounded by emptiness is brought into sharp focus
and thus offered for symbolic reading. Pavel has observed that "authors and cultures have the choice to minimize or maximize" the "unavoidable incompleteness" of fictional worlds; he has suggested that
cultures and periods of a "stable world view" tend to minimize incompleteness, whereas periods of "transition and conflict" tend to
maximize it (1986, 108, 109). Ryan uses the degrees of incompleteness
as a criterion for a triadic typology of fictional worlds. She has
demonstrated how the types are generated by a gradual emptying of
the "ideal" complete world model. Realistic fiction strives for the
highest degree of completeness, without ever being able to reach the
ideal (Ryan 1984, 131-34). Dallenbach has come independently to a
similar conclusion: the reality-like completeness of realistic narratives
is no more than an illusion "destined precisely to camouflage [their]
blanks" (1984, 201).
The variable saturation of fictional worlds is a challenge to the
reader, a challenge that increases as the saturation decreases. When
the reader reads and processes the fictional text, he or she reconstructs
the fictional world constructed by the author. But what does the
reader do with the zero texture and with the world's gaps? Wolfgang
Iser has given an answer to this question in a series of well-known
contributions (1971, 1974, 1978). Let it be recorded that Iser's model
is interactive; it asserts the control of the literary text over the act of
reading: "The process of assembling the meaning of the text is not a
private one, for although it does mobilize the subjective disposition
of the reader, it does not lead to daydreaming but to the fulfillment
of conditions that have already been structured in the text" (1978,
49-50).

Surprisingly, however, zero texture is not among the "structured"
textual conditions the reader has to "fulfill." Instead of positing gaps
170

Saturation
as immutable projections of the world-constructing texture, Iser
(both following and criticizing Ingarden) sees them as stimuli or propellants for the reader's imagination: "Without the elements of indeterminacy, the gaps in the text, we should not be able to use our
imagination" (1974, 283, see also 1978, 194). In recreating the world,
the reader's imagination "fills in the gaps left by the text itsel£" Necessarily, "each individual reader will fill in the gaps in his own way. As
he reads, he will make his own decision as to how the gap is to be
filled" (1974, 280; see also 1971). With respect to gaps, Iser's reader
does not submit to the text's control but makes his or her own decisions. The filling in of gaps is a subjective act and results in "realizations" that cannot be mutually compared or assessed; they are
"simply different" (Iser 1974, 281). Having escaped from the suprasubjective control of the text through the gaps, the Iserian reader reconstructs the fictional world guided by his or her life experience,
that is, by his or her communion with complete objects and worlds. 2
The filling in, which was claimed to be an exercise of imagination, is
in fact an act of Gleichschaltung: the diversity of fictional worlds is reduced to the uniform structure of the complete, Carnapian world.
Mimesis, which was jettisoned by modernist and postmodernist
world makers, returns with a vengeance to normalize the reader's
world reconstruction. 3
2. Implicitness

The opposition gaps/facts is only a crude representation of the
structuring of fictional worlds that is due to the presence/absence of
texture. Both the constructing texture and the constructed fictional
world are more finely modulated. We start our study of this intriguing phenomenon by looking at a simple case-the local setting of fictional stories. The texture of Franz Kafka's ''A Hunger Artist" [Ein
Hungerkiinstler] (1924) states explicitly that the artist was taken by
his impressario to many cities and countries in Europe, but it is silent
about any specific place and especially about the place of his final
feat. The locale of the protagonist's death is an irrecoverable gap in
171

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

the fictional world. 4 Kafkas gapping of local setting is especially
telling when contrasted with James Joyce's Dubliners (1914). Beginning with the title, the geography of Joyce's fictional world is explicitly and unambiguously determined by the name of various locales in
the Irish city. It is a fictional fact that the setting of Joyce's world is
Dublin. The third case, the constructional technique employed by
Ernest Hemingway in ''A Clean Well-Lighted Place" (1930), is the
most interesting. There is no mention of the country where the story
takes place, until we arrive at the following sentence: "The old man
... paid for the drinks, leaving half a pesata tip" (381). Obviously, this
sentence constructs an action, not a place. But it identifies the country implicitly, gives it away as a semantic "bonus" in the phrase "half
a peseta tip." It is legitimate to claim that Spain is the locale of the
short story's fictional world. 5
6
Today we know that implicitness is a universal feature of texts. In
everything we say or write-in conversation, journalistic prose, oratory, legal documents, religious texts, and so on-unsaid meanings
are implied. The meaning of all texts is a composite of overt and
covert semantic constituents. Although Prince writes specifically
about the narrative text, his statement applies to texts in general:
"Much of the information imparted is explicitly asserted, that is, presented in such a way that it can be naturally questioned or denied....
Much information may also be communicated implicitly: rather than
being asserted, it is more or less strongly suggested through contextual, rhetorical, connotative or other means" (1982, 36). Not surprisingly, implicit meaning has become one of the central issues of the
general theory of text and text processing (see especially Ducrot 1972;
Eco 1979; Kerbrat-Orecchioni 1982, 1986; van Dijk and Kintsch 1983;
van den Heuvel 1985, 65-85; Graesser and Clark 1985; Magliano and
Graesser 1991). While implicitness is omnipresent in verbal communication, different text types tolerate it differently. It seems to be
common in oratory, in some journalistic genres, and in religious
texts. It is detrimental to scientific texts, since it hinders their cognitive effectiveness. But in literary texts, implicitness is cultivated, it is

172

Saturation
a factor of their aesthetic effectiveness: "Literary discourse is a locus
of semantic indirection" (Riffaterre 1983, 112). The popularity of the
implicit in literature explains why literary interpretation is primarily,
or maybe exclusively, recovery of implicit meaning.7
In literary criticism, two interpretive methods are commonly practiced. The first one is intuitive and subjectivistic. A meaning is suggested that the critic feels or believes to be "hidden" in the text; the
text is made to mean what the interpreter wants it to mean. The second interpretive method is ideological: implicit meaning of a text is
obtained from an ideological system the critic has adopted. The procedure is reductionist: all texts are semantically interpreted by recourse to one and the same source; the meaning of a particular text is
a derivative of a universal ideology.
Clearly, these popular interpretive methods impose rather than recover implicit meaning. Literary semantics based on text theory parts
company with them by insisting that (1) there are markers of implicit
meaning in the explicit texture; and (2) implicit meaning is recovered
by specifiable procedures. These claims express what Ducrot has
called "unilateral dependence" between explicit and implicit meaning: an understanding of the explicit meaning is necessary for grasping the implicit, while the explicit can be understood without recognizing the implicit (1972, u; see also Kerbrat-Orecchioni 1986, 6). 8
How is implicit meaning marked, grounded, in the explicit texture? According to Ducrot, a lacuna, that is, some felt absence, is the
most suggestive marker of implicitness: "The implicit sentence is
marked, and marked only, by a gap in the sequence of explicit sentences" (1972, 8). Syntactical ellipsis is the most potent marker of this
kind, since "every text ... is in some way making the addressee expect (and foresee) the fulfillment of every unaccomplished sentence"
(Eco 1979, 214). Kerbrat-Orecchioni, while recognizing the role oflacunae, highlights the opposite kind of marking: the presence in the
texture of some signals or indexes, particularly hints, insinuations,
and allusions, most of them found in co-text or context (1986,
43-47).9 We are far from knowing all the markers of implicit mean-

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

ing, but it is reasonable to assume that they are both negative (lacunae) and positive (hints).
If we accept that explicit texture marks implicit meaning, how do
we go about recovering it? Since antiquity, the recovery of implicit
meaning has been closely associated with the logic of inference. Inference is conceived narrowly when defined as implication (entailment), that is, as "an act or a series of acts of reasoning which persons
perform when, from a proposition or set of propositions, P, they conclude a proposition or set of propositions, Q" (Bradley and Swartz
1979, 194). In contemporary logic, implication has been joined by a
second procedure of inference, baptized presupposition (in Strawson
1952, 175). Presupposition has been the topic oflively exchange between logicians, philosophers, and (text) linguists (see, for instance,
van Fraassen 1968, 1971; Bellert 1970; Lyons 1977, 2:592-606; Gazdar
1979, 89-128). But it seems to be one of those notions that become
more obfuscated as the literature devoted to them grows. Quite early,
Keenan recognized that the term has been stretched to cover both a
logical ("Strawsonian'') and a pragmatic notion. The logical presupposition is defined on truth-conditional grounds: ''A sentence S logically presupposes a sentence S' just in case S logically implies S' and
the negation of S, ~S, also logically implies S' ." One of Keenan's examples: "Fred went back/did not go back to Boston'' presupposes
"Fred has been in Boston'' (1971, 45, 47). The pragmatic notion refers
to "certain culturally defined conditions or contexts" that have to be
satisfied "in order for an utterance of that sentence to be understood
(in its literal, intended meaning)"; in other words, "an utterance of a
sentence pragmatically presupposes that its context is appropriate."
In some languages, for example, the sex of the speaker is presupposed
by the grammatical form of the verb (1971, 49-50). These two notions of presupposition are clearly different, indeed, incompatible,
but the semanticians continue to stretch the concept to subsume all
the conditions that must be satisfied for a sentence (utterance) to be
understood. lo In a radical reaction to this inflation, Lycan has called
for a removal of the concept from semantics (1984, 78-108).
But we cannot deny the role of presuppositions in the recovery of
174

Saturation

implicit meaning just because there is confusion around the notion.
To demonstrate this role, let me return to our example from Hemingway. It is the unexpressed presupposition, "Peseta is the currency
of Spain," that makes it possible to infer that the action of the story,
''A Clean Well-Lighted Place," takes place in Spain. Interestingly, presupposition is one of the few concepts of modern logic that has been
welcomed into the study of literature-by Prince (1973), Chatman
(1978), and Culler (1981). Prince has rephrased the truth-conditional
definition of presupposition in informal terms: presupposition of a
statement is "the semantic element common to that statement, its
negation, and its corresponding yes-no question" (1982, 41; for
Culler's formulation, see 1981, n1). 11
Indeed, implicitness based on presupposition is a major source of
fictional-world construction and reconstruction. Prince drew our attention to existential presuppositions "which indicate 'what there is"'
(1982, 43). In. other words, an entity is often introduced into the fictional world by way of existential presuppositions. They figure especially prominently in the "opening sentences in novels" (Culler 1981,
rr4-15). Let us recall the first sentence of Dostoevsky's The Idiot: ''.At
about nine o'clock in the morning at the end of November, during a
thaw, the Warsaw train was approaching Petersburg at full speed"
(27). One of the existential presuppositions of this sentence-"there
are trains" -inserts this means of transportation into Dostoevsky's
fictional world, constructs it as a piece of its "furniture," and thus
makes it available for the fictional persons' travel.
For the semantics of fictional narrative, inferences regarding aspects and constituents of acting are of special significance. We know
already (II.1) that in action descriptions any of the factors of acting
can be deleted (see Davidson 1980, 54; van Dijk 1977, 108-rr). If, for
example, the agent is not expressed in the constructing texture of an
action (say, by the use of a passive construction), we infer his or her
existence. Two sentences from the first chapter of Franz Kafka's The
Trial provide an instructive example: "You are under arrest.... Proceedings have now been instituted against you" [Sie sind ja verhaftet.
... Das Verfahren ist nun einmal eingeleitet] (8). Knowing that ar175

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

rests are made on somebody's orders, the reader infers that an anonymous person or institution is behind Joseph K's arrest.
The most popular inferring in the domain of acting concerns the
mental traits and the overall character of fictional persons. Explicit
information about exterior fictional facts, such as the environment in
which the person lives, his or her relationships with other persons,
and so on, can be tapped for inferring his or her internal characteristics. But certainly the main source of inference is the persons' acting-verbal, mental, and physical (Margolin 1986, 208; 1987, 113). In
other words, from what a fictional person does, we infer who he or
she is. Yet many precautions have to be taken when inferring the
mental traits of fictional persons from their actions. Corrections
might be necessary, especially if it is discovered that the acts that
served as the source of the inference were pretended, insincere, or deceiving (Margolin 1986, 215-16). And we have to reckon with persons
who act inconsistently or even irrationally-Nastasja Filipovna and
Rogozin in Dostoevsky's The Idiot (III.1.3). The reconstruction by inference of the overall personality structure is especially treacherous,
and we can hardly expect more than tentative results-one of the
most telling testimonies to the openness of literary interpretation.
Readers will always disagree and critics argue about whether Constant's Adolphe was irresponsible, immoral, and, therefore, guilty of
Ellenore's death (see Charles 1977, 241-42).
While in these and similar examples the logical procedure of presupposition has been applied, it is obvious that by itself it provides us
only with trivial implied meanings, reformulations of the explicit texture. "When they left Tostes Madame Bovary was pregnant" implies
"When they left Tostes Madame Bovary expected a child." The same
utterance presupposes "Madame Bovary no longer lives in Tostes."
Logical inference is necessary but not sufficient for the processing of
implicit meaning. Cognitive operations have to be activated in order
to recover more than trivial or self-evident implied meanings. A return
to our initial example shows that in order to formulate the presupposition "The peseta is the currency of Spain," we have to search in our store
of knowledge, in our encyclopedia, for the term "peseta." The same

Saturation
holds true about the inference of an agency behind Joseph K.'s arrest,
which inference rests on our knowledge of the structure of action.
In most cases, inference by presupposition requires knowledge
about the world; a logical procedure has a cognitive base. 12 The introduction of cognitive factors into inferring necessarily relativizes
the procedure and makes the implied meaning indeterminate. The
origin of the indeterminancy can be demonstrated in the case of the
enthymeme, 13 the oldest known device of implicitness. Let us again
proceed from an example, this time borrowed from Kerbrat-Orecchioni: "The bell rang twice, it must be the postman." The implicit
major premise is 'The postman usually rings twice"' (1986, 166). But,
clearly, this enthymeme cannot be construed by purely logical means;
we have to know about the postman's habitual signal in order to posit
the unexpressed premise. If the interpreter had no knowledge of this
habit, he or she would not be able to make the inference. Or, if in
some other culture it is the milkman who rings twice, a different enthymeme would obtain: "The bell rang twice, it must be the milkman." Encyclopedia as shared communal knowledge varies with cultures, social groups, historical epochs, and for this reasons relativizes
the recovery of implicit meaning.

3. Fictional Encyclopedia
This much has been stated by Eco. I propose to substantially expand the range of encyclopedic knowledge: the actual-world encyclopedia is just one among numerous encyclopedias of possible
worlds. Knowledge about a possible world constructed by a fictional
text constitutes a fictional encyclopedia. Fictional encyclopedias are
many and diverse, but all of them to a greater or lesser degree digress
from the actual-world encyclopedia. Modernist and postmodernist
fiction offers striking examples of this divergence. The geography of
Gabriel Garcia Marquez' novel Love in the Time of Cholera (1985) illustrates a minimal but nevertheless significant departure. The fictional text provides many names of actual locations-Ricohacha,
Rionegro, the Magdalena River, the Caribbean, the Andes, and so
177

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

on-for the reader to infer with the aid of the actual-world encyclopedia that the story takes place in Colombia. But the main locale of
the action, the town of La Manga, cannot be found on any map of
Colombia (just as we could not find the Macondo of Garcia
Marquez's previous novels). 14 Garcia Marquez does not describe the
actual Colombia but constructs a possible Colombia. His fictional
characters possess, as part of their encyclopedia, the mental map of
this possible country. 15 They invoke it in their deictic references, in
the presuppositions, and in their inferring from the beginning of the
story. When examining, in the opening chapter, the body ofJeremiah
de Saint-Amour, Dr. Juvenal Urbino "realized that he could not get
to the Cathedral before the Gospel reading" (7). Dr. Urbino can draw
this conclusion only from the internalized fictional encyclopedia where
the information about the distance between his dead friend's house
and the cathedral is recorded.
Now a significant cognitive difference between actual readers and
fictional persons comes into sight. The mental map of Colombia
stored by Garcia Marquez's readers shows Cartegena, Aracarata (Garcia Marquez' birthplace), Bogota, Medellin, and Cali (because of
their notoriety), and possibly other actual places. The fictional inhabitants of Garcia Marquez' world do not know any of these places.
Their mental map centers around La Manga, a place that does not at
all figure on the actual readers' map. The fictional encyclopedia is the
only store of knowledge of the fictional persons; they have no access
to the actual-world encyclopedia. The actual readers have a wider
cognitive range: they store.the actual-world encyclopedia, and they
can acquire the fictional one by reading Garcia Marquez' text. In fact,
to orient themselves in the fictional world, to make valid inferences
and to recover implicit meaning, the readers must include in their
cognitive store the corresponding fictional encyclopedia.
I spoke about a minimal departure in Garcia Marquez' case, because the fictional and the actual-world encyclopedia overlap to a
large degree. Fantastic fiction provides us with numerous examples of
fictional encyclopedias that contradict the actual-world counterpart,
as any visitor to the nonnatural or supernatural worlds quickly dis178

Saturation

covers. As he or she crosses from the natural into the nonnatural
world, his or her encyclopedia has to be modified. The visitor has to
learn the encyclopedia of the alien world. The narrator-protagonist of
Bruno Schulz's story "Sanatorium under the Sign of the Hourglass"
(1937)-from the collection of the same title-goes through this experience. Visiting his father, who is dead in the natural world but
alive in the surrealist world of the sanatorium, he comes equipped
with the actual-world encyclopedia. He soon discovers that he has to
relearn everything that in his encyclopedia pertains to time. The
world of the sanatorium operates on a time pattern different from
that of the actual world. The visitor's principal informer, Dr. Gotard,
explains to him the principle of fictional-world time: "We have put
back the dock. Here we are always late by a certain interval of time
of which we cannot define the length" (117). At this point the narrator makes an inference about his father: "In that case ... my father
must be on his deathbed or about to die" (117). But the inference is
incorrect, because the narrator proceeds from a limited knowledge;
he does not yet know the most important feature of the time shift:
"Here we reactivate the past with all its possibilities, therefore also including the possibility of recovery'' (117).
As the protagonist-narrator becomes fluent in the encyclopedia of
the sanatorium world, his reasoning leads to correct conclusions.
Now he can explain even the most bizarre events, such as his father's
simultaneous appearance at two place. The natural-world encyclopedia leads to a logical dilemma, whereas there is none when the sanatorium world's encyclopedia is applied: "How do I reconcile all this?
Has Father been sitting in the restaurant, driven there by an unhealthy greed, or has he been lying in bed feeling very ill? Are there
two fathers? Nothing of the kind. The problem is the quick decomposition of time no longer watched with incessant vigilance" (127).
The peak of understanding is reached when the visitor is able to
comment on and evaluate the fictional-world's time pattern: "Time
put back-it sounded good, but what does it come to in reality?
Does anyone here get time at its full value, a true time, time cut off
from a fresh bolt of doth, smelling of newness and dye? Quite the

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

contrary. It is used-up time, worn out by other people, a shabby time
full of holes, like a sieve" (131). This valuation reveals how deeply the
narrator's natural-world origin is inscribed in his encyclopedia. He
passes judgment by comparing the remembered temporal order of his
native world and that experienced in the world visited. Recognizing
the vacuity of time in the world of the sanatorium, he decides to flee,
although he will never again find a real home in his native world.
Schulz's story constructs two parallel worlds, one natural, the
other nonnatural, with two fictional encyclopedias, one corresponding to the actual-world encyclopedia, the other one deviating from it.
The most radical departure from the actual world encyclopedia is the
encyclopedia of impossible worlds (Pr.2.2, Vl-4-2, Ep.4). In the last
section of his novel 98. 6 (1975), Ronald Sukenick constructs what appears as a counterfactual, but not impossible, Israel: "In Israel there
are places where the jungle comes down to the sea.... Despite the
jungle and the deserts inland Israel has perfect weather year round.
... Automobiles have long been exiled from the cities and towns
where transportation depends on various beasts of burden camels
burros oxen" (168, 171). The inhabitants of the fictional Israel include
these facts in their encyclopedia and act and reason accordingly.
Thus, when the Ich-narrator wants to visit his friend Yizak Fawzi, he
catches "a caravan across to Jordan" and enjoys the camel ride (168).
At first reading, the conditions in this land (including intensive
sexual activity) suggest that it is a utopia, succeeding and replacing
the failed utopia of the California settlement (narrated in section 2 of
the novel). But then we learn about the logical principles by which
Sukenick's Israel is constructed: "Here in Israel the extraordinary is
run-of-the-mill. We are capable of living in a state in which certain
things that have happened have not. At the same time that they have.
. . . The way you enter The State of Israel is through Psychosynthesis.
In the processes of Psychosynthesis as in the subconscious as in the
laws of physics there is no negation" (179). Now we see that the compossibility of jungles and deserts in Israel is merely a geographical
counterfactual. A much more radical project is implemented in the
last section of Sukenick's novel: a radical logical rupture, the replace180

Saturation
ment of standard (classical) logic by nonstandard logic. Inspired by a
popular version of quantum mechanics, Sukenick experiments with
an impossible fictional world constructed according to a Schrodingerian encyclopedia, an encyclopedia where "there is no negation."
For a mind storing a Schrodingerian encyclopedia, logical principles
of impossible worlds become comprehensible.
The immensely varied fictional encyclopedias guide the recovery
of implicit meaning in fictional texts. In order to reconstruct and interpret a fictional world, the reader has to reorient his cognitive
stance to agree with the world's encyclopedia. In other words, knowledge of the fictional encyclopedia is absolutely necessary for the
reader to comprehend a fictional world. The actual-world encyclopedia might be useful, but it is by no means universally sufficient; for
many fictional worlds it is misleading, it provides not comprehension
but misreading. The readers have to be ready to modify, supplement,
or even discard the actual-world encyclopedia. Like Schulz's hero,
they must background the knowledge of their actual domicile and
become cognitive residents of the fictional world they visit through
the act of reading. As long as the reader reads, his or her knowledge
expands by incorporating further and further fictional encyclopedias.
The reader's encyclopedia is one of those "dynamic" knowledge structures that "must be able to change as a result of new experiences"
(Schank 1986, 7).
A final point about the fictional-world encyclopedia: the explicit
markers of implicitness, such as lacunae, hints, innuendoes, and so
on, are local triggers, but the fictional encyclopedia is a global condition of the recovery of implicit meaning. Our interpretive decisions
and the reconstruction of the fictional world are guided by a cognitive macroresource .

4. Saturation Function
Throughout this chapter, we have observed the dependence of the
fictional world's facts and gaps on the explicit, implicit, and zero texture of the constructing text. Now we express this dependence in
181

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

Schema4
W(I)

T

Implicit

Zero---- ---------------------

I Determinate
•

Indeterminate

Q Gap

terms of a special intensional function, the function of saturation. Let
us start by calling the distribution of explicit, implicit, and zero texture the text's density. In many texts, and particularly literary texts,
density shows certain regularities. 16 If we perceive a regularity of density, we can say that a three-value intensional function is supported
by the texture. It projects the text's density onto the fictional world
structuring its saturation: the explicit texture constructs the determinate domain, the implicit texture the indeterminate domain, and
zero texture the domain of gaps. Schema 4 is a representation of the
intentional function of saturation.
The determinate domain represents the solid core of the fictional
world, its determinate facts. Thanks to their mode of constructionexplicit texture-all fictional facts are of the same semantic status.
The core is supplemented by the fuzzy domain of indeterminate
182

Saturation
facts. Because the indeterminate fictional facts are constructed by implicit texture and have to be recovered by a relativized procedure of
inference, their semantic status cannot be uniform .. Some fictional
facts constructed implicitly are quite definite, such as Hemingway's
Spain; others resemble suggestions or hypotheses, such as the character of Constant's Adolphe. Yet even the fictional fact "This is Spain"
(in Hemingway's story) remains somewhat indeterminate, because of
the vicissitudes of implicit meaning recovery. If a reader does not
know that the peseta is the currency of Spain, the fictional fact will
not be included in the reconstructed fictional world. If the reader is a
pedant, he might claim that the story takes place in Mexico or somewhere in South America. Searching diligently through dictionaries
and encyclopedias, the pedant will namely discover that the word peseta is used in colloquial Mexican Spanish to designate twenty-five
centavos. He or she will also find the expression peseta columnaria,
which in some South American countries applied to a coin with a
royal coat of arms between columns.
In any case, inference always leads to fictional facts less determinate than those constructed by explicit statements. Kerbrat-Orecchioni speaks about "a scale" of implicitness, noting that its markers
"can be more or less strongly coded, some insistently inviting such
and such interpretation, while others, more timid, are content to be
only vague, capricious and chancy indications of a value that the
structure bears only by accident" (1986, 48). In plain English, implicit
meaning is suggestive rather than definite. Because of this property of
implicit texture, indeterminate fictional facts are plastic, and the fictional-world maker can use them for different purposes-to construct a background for determinate facts, to style a domain in an
"impressionistic" manner, to create a zone of ambiguity, and so on.
The opposition of foreground/background has been invoked by
Martinez-Bonati to demonstrate the fundamental difference between
the actual-world and the fictional-world structuring. Using as contrastive framework Nicolai Hartmann's hierarchical model of the actual world-constituted by the material, organic, mental, and spiritual levels-Martinez-Bonati has pointed out that in fictional worlds

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

any of these levels can be backgrounded and thus the world's hierarchy redefined. For example, Wolfgang Goethe, in his novel Die
Wahlverwandtschaften, suppresses the material and organic levels and
constructs explicitly only the mental and spiritual levels. A telling instance of this manipulation is the absence of the material setting, but
its main manifestation is the structuring of Goethe's fictional person:
"Here, the highest possible definiteness is achieved not in the physical side of the characters, that is perceptible to the senses, but in their
moral traits" (Martinez-Bonati 1976, 179). Fictional-world structuring has a stratification of its own-a determinate foreground and a
vague background. This stratification is a variable, as indicated by the
fact that in Goethe's novel the mental and spiritual ("das SeelischGeistige") constitutes the foreground, whereas the behavioristic
method puts the sensual ("das Sinnliche") into the foreground (1976,
182).
The saturation function is perfectly compatible with MartinezBonati's fictional-world stratification. Both reaffirm the structural
specificity of fictional worlds vis-a-vis the actual world. The intensional function of saturation confirms that the laws of the fictionalworlds sovereignty are inscribed in the fictional text. But these laws
are not protected and enforced by any extratextual authority. Therefore, they can be and are ignored by many readers and interpreters. This
is especially true about the law of the world's saturation. No semantics of gaps and implicit meaning, no rules ofinference will influence
a reader who wants to read "suspiciously," that is, who sees in every
expression a clue to a secret, hidden meaning (Eco 1992, 48-49). Although there is no punishment for violating the sovereignty of fictional worlds, there is a reward for respecting it. When the reader
avoids prejudicial reading, his or her reconstruction of the fictional
world becomes a creative act.

I

CHAPTER VIII

(A)

Modern Myth

The concepts of authentication and saturation, explained in chapters
VI and VII, are theoretical tools indispensable for understanding the
fundamental features of fictional worlds, their coming into existence,
and their structuring. They are especially indispensable in analyses
and interpretations of the experiments in modernist and postmodernist fiction of the twentieth century, such as self-voiding narratives,
conventionalized Ich-form, metafiction, impossible fictional worlds,
and so on. In this, the last chapter of this book, I direct the basic theoretical concepts of the possible-worlds semantics of fictionality toward a particularly fascinating creation of twentieth-century fiction
making: the modern myth.

1.

The Classical and the Modern Myth

From the very beginning of culture, humans have sought to understand the world in which they live and toil. Both intellect and
imagination have been engaged in the service of that search. The
most ancient, mythological imagination provided an understanding
of the human world by surrounding it with vast alien spaces, seats of
nonhuman or superhuman powers and individuals. The alethic struc-

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

Schema 5
W(E)

9 Natural
0 Supernatural

. ···r·

..•., ..,.,••\..., .,..
., ... .., .
.....
......

Mythological World

w; (!)-Hybrid

W

.-• ••-

W

W

W2 (!)-Visible/Invisible

Kafka's Worlds

W(I)

At-- -

---- ~

\::)

Q Visible
Q Invisible
Q Shadows

Belyj's World

0 Phantoms
Government

Party

ture of the mythological world is dyadic, 1 and the natural and the supernatural domains are separated by a sharp boundary (V.6.1). The
relationships of power and accessibility are asymmetrical: the natural
domain is under the governance of supernatural beings who have ac186

Modern Myth
cess into their fiefdom, although often in material bodies or special
guises. The human inhabitants of the natural domain are powerless
vis-a-vis their supernatural lords and are denied access into their
Edenic habitat. Human fate is governed by nonhuman forces or beings, which neither individuals nor humanity as a whole can control
or mollify. The denial of physical access has crippling consequences
for the human knowledge of the supernatural. Since knowledge cannot be gained by direct observation, humans have to rely on self-appointed informers and their subjective, unverifiable reports.
This restatement of the semantic structure of the mythological
world is necessary for understanding its transformation into the
modern myth of the twentieth century. Two kinds of semantic transformations are involved, and, therefore, two variants of the modern
myth emerge: (1) The boundary between the natural and supernatural domains is removed and their modal opposition neutralized. The
dyadic mythological world is transformed into a unified hybrid
world. (2) The boundary between the two domains is preserved, as
well as their asymmetrical relationships, but the modal (extensional)
opposition is replaced by an intensional contrast of saturation
(VIl.4). Both domains of the world are natural, but one of them,
constructed explicitly, is determinate, "visible," the other one, constructed implicitly, indeterminate, "invisible." Schema 5 is a representation of the transformation of the classical mythological world
into the modern-myth structures.
2. The Hybrid World

The hybrid world, created by Franz Kafka, has had a tremendous
impact on modernist and postmodernist fiction. Because the boundary that divides the fictional world of the classical myth is dissolved,
the hybrid world is a coexistence, in one unified fictional space, of the
physically possible and physically impossible fictional entities (persons, events). Physically impossible events cannot be interpreted as
miraculous interventions from the supernatural domain, since no
such domain exists; all phenomena and events of the hybrid world,

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

both those physically possible and those physically impossible, are
generated within this world, spontaneously and haphazardly. The
alethic conditions in the hybrid world require us to abandon the natural/ supernatural opposition. I refer to the entities in the hybrid
world that violate physical possibility as "bizarre."
A model of Kafka's hybrid world is provided in his short text entitled ''A Crossbreed" [Eine Kreuzung] (1917). The unique animal of
this story, "half kitten, halflamb" [halb Katzchen, halb Lamm], demonstrates all the features of hybridization: (1) it has some properties of
the cat-the head and the claws, and some of the lamb-the size and
the shape; (2) it possesses properties that both animals share-the
eyes, the coat, the movements, and the restlessness [die Unruhe]; (3)
it lacks some features of its original species-"it cannot mew and abhors rats" [miauen kann es nicht und von Ratten hat es Abscheu]. Finally and most importantly, in addition to the features derived, inherited, from its "parents," the hybrid acquires emergent properties
of its own; it is alien to both cats and lambs and seems to possess
some human properties: "Did this cat with the soul of a lamb also
have the ambition to be human" [Menschenehrgeiz]? (303, 395). To
sum up, the bizarre hybrid behaves as a cat, as a lamb, as neither, and,
tentatively, as a human being. 2
The most famous story of Kafka's hybrid world is "The Metamorphosis" [Die Verwandlung] (1912). A physically impossible event happens
for no reason and without any explanation: one morning Gregor
Samsa wakes up in the form of an Ungeziefer (pest, vermin).3 Gregor
has changed from a human being into a hybrid form with both human and animal features. The bizarre event is not yet fully domesticated. Although Gregor's family and other human inhabitants of the
hybrid world do not try to explain the metamorphosis as a supernatural event, they react emotionally as if it were one-with horror and
revulsion. In the story ''A Country Doctor [Ein Landarzt] (1917), the
hybrid world is fully established; the unexpected discovery of a pair
of horses and a groom in an unused pigsty is greeted with amusement
by the doctor and his maid. The maid's comment indicates that she
understands perfectly the workings of the hybrid world: "One never
188

Modern Myth
knows what is in store in one's own house" [Man weisst nicht, was fur
Dinge man im eigenen Hause vorratig hat] (124; 164). The bizarre,
the physically impossible, is in the midst of the human world, waiting there to be discovered or to interfere, purely by chance. Having
been lured into the hybrid world by "a false alarm on the night bell"
[Fehllauten der Nachtglocke], the doctor, riding a truly hybrid
equipage-"with an earthly vehicle, unearthly horses" (128; 170)cannot escape from its modality.
Once he had discovered the hybrid world, Kafka used its semantic potential to generate many and diverse stories. In "The Cares of a
Family Man" [Die Sorge des Hausvater] (1917), a hybrid thing-being
cohabits with people in their house and even engages in simple conversations. In "The Hunter Gracchus" [Der Jager Gracchus] (1917),
the modal conditions of the hybrid world make it possible for a dead
man to coexist with living people. To be precise, Gracchus, quite in
accordance with the semantics of the hybrid world, is both dead and
"in a certain sense" [gewissermasen] alive too (287; 368). I believe that
the modus of the hybrid world also strongly influences the wellknown story "The Judgment" [Das Urteil] (1912). Strictly speaking,
no bizarre event happens in this narrative, but the father's unexpected
curse and Georg's self-destructive reaction are so hyperbolized that
they produce the effect of the bizarre. Finally, "A Report for an Academy" [Ein Bericht fur eine Akademie] (1917) is a self-parody of the
hybrid world, specifically, of the "Metamorphosis": an animal becomes a hybrid being, acquiring essential human features but at the
same time preserving some properties of the ape nature [Affennatur].
In this story, the process of hybridization is perfectly natural: the ape
becomes an anthropoid by persistent and diligent learning.4
3. The Visible/Invisible World

This variant of.the modern myth emerges independently, but almost simultaneously, in the fiction of Andrej Belyj and Franz Kafka.
Although the two writers did not know each other's work and were
probably not even aware of each other's existence, the fictional worlds

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

of their most accomplished novels, Belyj's Petersburg (1916) and
Kafka's The Trial (1925) and The Castle (1926), reveal a profound semantic similarity.5 As already indicated, the split in the fictional
world is brought about by textural strategies of the saturation function (VIl.4): the facts of the visible (determinate) domain are constructed explicitly, those of the invisible (indeterminate) domain implicitly. Thus in Belyj's Petersburg, the senator is a person of the
visible d9main, his properties, actions, and setting are determinate:
"My senator had just reached his sixty-eighth year" (5; 5); ''Apollon
Apollonovic raised his bald head and strode out of the room'' (9; 7);
"Nikolaj Appolonovic's quarters consisted of rooms, a bedroom, a
study and a reception room'' (40; 27). In contrast, the senator's superiors are not explicitly constructed; their existence is inferred from a
texture that expresses action without specifying its agent(s) (by the
common device of passive voice): ''Apollon Apollonovic Ableuchov
was peremptorily struck from the list of candidates for an exceptionally important post" (385; 232).
It is by the same device-deleting the agent from the action-constructing texture-that Kafka creates the invisible domain in The
Trial. Let me repeat the words (see VII.2) addressed to Joseph K. by
the wardens in the opening scene of the novel: "You are under arrest.
... Proceedings have now been instituted against you" [Sie sind ja
verhaftet .... Das Verfahren ist nun einmal eingeleitet] (8; 5-6). The
texture presupposes the existence of some authority that ordered
Joseph K.'s arrest but hides its identity. Later on, the authority is
given a name, "the Court," but it will remain hidden, invisible, to the
very end of Joseph K.'s ordeal. Similarly, the seat of power in the second novel of Kafka, "the castle hill," "was hidden, veiled in mist and
darkness, nor was there even a glimmer of light to show that a big
castle was there" (7; 3). Later the castle is "clearly defined in the clear
air" [deutlich umrissen in der klaren Luft] (n; n), but K. is unable to
reach it. 6
In Belyj's Petersburg, the dyadic structure is complicated by two
additional features. First, a transitional, intermediate domain of shadows is inserted between the visible and the invisible domains. In fact,

Modern Myth
it is the climate of the city of Petersburg, with its frequent fogs, that
generates the shadows: "The streets of Petersburg possess one indubitable quality: they transform passers-by into shadows; and shadows,
the streets of Petersburg transform into people" (32; 22). Despite its
murky mode of existence-or, rather, precisely because of it-the domain of shadows is the core of Belyj's fictional world, the main setting of the novel's conflict and the origin of its main intrigue.
Second, Belyj's fictional world is split into politically antagonistic
spheres. The struggle between the government of imperial Russia and
the revolutionary "Party'' cuts across all three layers of the fictional
world. The highest institutions of government and the headquarters
of the rebellion (the central committee of the Party) operate in the invisible world. In the visible world, the antagonism is symbolized by
the tension between the glamorous city center ("the prospects") and
the shabby suburbs ("the islands"). The visible branch of government,
residing on the prospects, is represented by Senator Ableuchov. The
islands, the breeding ground of rebellion, are inhabited by visible secondary characters ("the people"). Although they live in segregated
quarters, the rulers and the ruled cannot be separated; the prospects
are linked with the islands by bridges. The bridges play a prominent
role in the story of Petersburg and, particularly, in the life history of
its protagonist, Nikolaj Apollonovic, the senator's son. Nikolaj is a
"split" individual, living and acting in both antagonistic worlds, the
world of the prospects, where he belongs by birth and dwelling, and
the world of the islands, where he finds political allies in his private
rebellion against his father. Nikolaj's life is the history of a person
who is alienated from the world of privilege but who fails to find a
place in the ranks of the revolutionaries.
Let us repeat that the struggle between the rulers and the rebels is
played out primarily in the domain of shadows. Here, the identities
and loyalties of the agents are confused because of the anonymity of
its inhabitants-"shadows have no faces." The lack of clear identification creates most favorable conditions for double agents (agents
provocateurs) who serve or seem to serve both sides of the political
conflict. The confusion in the domain of shadows is best represented

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

in the minor figure of Morkovin who claims to be "an ardent terrorist" (235; 145) but admits to serving in the secret police [ochranka] as
well (236; 146). He then gives the following explanation for his double role: "I have been assigned to the secret police by the party'' (237;
146). If we believe this statement, Morkovin is an agent of the revolutionary party serving in the secret police; if we believe the logic of
his actions, he is an agent of the secret police who penetrated the
party. There is no possibility of determining beyond doubt his true
allegiance. A faceless individual cannot be revealed as double-faced.
In the confrontation of two armies of shadows, infiltration and confusion are a necessary consequence of their mode of operation.
In Kafka's universe, the lines between the visible and the invisible
domains are drawn more strictly. In The Castle, the two domains are
set in different spaces, the invisible one on the castle hill, the visible
one in the village at the foot of the hill. In The Trial the Court's proceedings and activities seem to take place in temporary, ad hoc selected locations anywhere in the city (an ordinary house, the lumber
room in the Bank).
A prominent feature of Kafka's fictional world is the lively traffic
between the contrary and separated domains. In both novels, the invisible world establishes a "bridgehead" in the visible domain: the village office [Herrenhof] of the castle in The Castle, the attic offices of
the Court (which seem to be the one permanent locale) in The Trial.
In these visible divisions, direct contacts between representatives of
the invisible domain and selected inhabitants of the visible domain
take place. A more significant factor of the lively contacts between
the domains is the introduction of two special groups of mediating
agents: emissaries and informers. Emissaries are agents of the invisible powers charged with carrying out a specific mission in the visible
domain. Such are the warders who arrest Joseph K. in The Trial and
the clownish assistants of K. in The Castle. Since the emissaries receive their instructions from the invisible domain, their credentials
cannot be verified. Their authority rests solely on the fact that the inhabitants of the visible domain do not question the legitimacy of the
invisible power. The informers, on the other hand, are inhabitants of

Modern Myth
the visible domain who control the flow of information across the
boundary. Occasionally, they volunteer to carry messages from the
visible into the invisible domain (Barnabas in The Castle); more typically, they are self-appointed reporters who provide the inhabitants
of the visible domain with information about conditions and activities in the invisible domain. Titorelli, in The Trial and Olga, in The
Castle, are the most important of these informers. Their information
is necessarily subjective and unreliable: hearsay, rumor, traditional
tales.7 Behind the veil of unreliable, ofren contradictory, descriptions,
the Court and the castle remain a mystery for the inhabitants of the
visible domain.

4. The Pattern of Control
One and the same hierarchy of power is typical of both Kafka's
and Belyj's fictional worlds: the visible domain is under the dominion and control of the invisible domain. In Kafka's world, where no
intermediate zone is interposed, the pattern of control is relatively
simple: the visible-domain inhabitants are under permanent threat of
an order, a decree, a decision that originates in the invisible domain and deeply affects their existence. In The Trial the Court selects
the accused with the randomness and capriciousness of an authoritarian regime. Suddenly, without apparent cause and with no proper
explanation, the invisible Court strikes to change radically the life
history of those persons against whom "proceedings have been instituted." While the defendants seem to represent a small group within
the population, the randomness of the selection subjects everybody
to the Court's unpredictable decisions. Moreover, there is no escaping the claws of the Court. Titorelli informs Joseph K. (in chap. 8)
that he had never heard of a single case of "definite acquittal." If an
"ostensible acquittal" [scheinbare Freisprechung] is granted, the case
can be reopened at any time in the future; in fact, the acquitted
might be rearrested the moment he returns home from the Court. In
The Castle the submission of the village to the invisible authorities
has all the features of feudal fief, including ius primae noctis (see Bei193

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

cken 1974, 333-34). With respect to the hero, the castle's arrogance is
apparent in the fact that it arbitrarily, repeatedly, and without explanation reverses its decisions about his status and changes his instruction to him. The meticulous and pedantic bureaucracy of the castle
operates no less randomly than the judges of the Court.
The asymmetry of power is a breeding ground for revolt. Joseph
K.'s rebellion is purely rhetorical but is clearly apparent when compared with the attitude of such defendants as Block. Whereas Block
accepts without questioning the rules of the game imposed by the
Court, Joseph K. challenges by rational arguments the irrationality of
these rules. He is deterred neither by warnings nor by threats; he
rushes to judgment, convinced of his innocence. He persists in his
defiance to the end, up to his very last pathetic question: "Where was
the judge whom he had never seen? Where was the High Court,
which he had never reached?" [zu dem er nie gekommen war] (165;
286). In The Castle, K.'s rebellion is emotional and short-lived; he is
so fascinated by the castle that only exceptionally does he think of his
relationship with the invisible authority in terms of conflict (51; 59). The
real rebel of The Castle is Amalia, but her refusal to submit to the feudal power damns not only her but her entire family (see Politzer 1969,
50; Heller 1974, 132).
In Belyj's Petersburg, the pattern of control is more intricate due to
the confusing role of the intermediate domain of shadows. In principle, power is directed from the invisible into the visible domain. This
subordination is nowhere more apparent than in the case of the
seemingly all-powerful senator. I have already quoted (VIII.1) the decision of the invisible powers to remove the senator's name from the
list of candidates for a high governmental post. The end of his career
comes when he refuses, because of his legalistic convictions, to obey
an order from the invisible government. Significantly, his refusal is
characterized as "rebellion," an interpretation that links Ableuchov's
disobedience with the central conflict in the novel's world. The visible representative of the ruling power becomes a "traitor" when, at a
moment of crisis, he refuses to act unlawfully.
But the domain of shadows affects substantially the pattern of
194

Modern Myth
control: the ultimate source of "instructions" is uncertain. The main
intrigue of the novel, Nikolaj Apollonovic's mission to kill his own
father, is particularly telling. Nikolaj receives a bomb from Dudkin,
the underground revolutionary operating as a shadow; Dudkin has
acted on the instructions of another shadow, Lippancenko. The letter
demanding that Nikolaj use the bomb against his father goes by a different route but can also be traced to Lippancenko, because it is
signed with his cryptogram. Because both Dudkin and Nikolaj believe that Lippancenko is a high-ranking functionary of the Party,
they assume that both the bomb and the letter come from the Party's
invisible headquarters. 8 In fact, the macrostructure ofBelyj's fictional
world makes it impossible to state with certainty where the plot
against Senator Ableuchov originates. All that can be said with assurance is that it is traceable to the domain of shadows. However, due to
the presence of double agents, actions that originate in this domain
may be equally a revolutionary plot or a government-induced provocation. A third, most intriguing alternative can be contemplated,
given Belyj's fictional-world structure: the instruction to kill Senator
Ableuchov is not mediated by the domain of shadows but actually
originates in it. Because of their mode of operation, the shadows cannot be fully controlled from "above"; they could become an autonomous source of decision making and acting, playing their own
game. The shadows may turn against their own masters.
The mission of the executioners in the last chapter of Kafka's The
Trial raises a similar question. It has been commonly accepted that
the two gentlemen who kill Joseph K. "like a dog" were sent by the
Court to implement its sentence. This inference is derived from the
fictional encyclopedia of The Trial: since the Court's proceedings and
decisions are purely random and arbitrary, any random and arbitrary
event affecting the defendant-if no other source is given-is assigned to the Court. But textural evidence indicates that the executioners are not the Court's emissaries. As we have observed (STil.2),
the representatives of the Court are named consistently by definite
descriptions corresponding to their function in the institution-the
judges, the magistrates, the wardens, the prison chaplain-but the
195

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

executioners do not carry such a label. They are vaguely called "two
gentlemen," "his companions" [seine Begleiter]; Joseph K. perceives
them as "old minor actors, maybe ... tenors" and even asks them in
which theater they perform (162; 280-81).
If we accept that Kafka's executioners and Belyj's "terrorists" have
dubious credentials, a rather intriguing hypothesis about the conditions in the world of the modern myth can be contemplated. Behind
the institutionalized randomness of the invisible Court and the invisible government hides an anonymous, noninstitutionalized randomness. The world of random arrests and secret court proceedings
breeds "freelancing" agents, private terrorists who pursue their own
goals and carry out their own missions. The observers of such a
world, its readers and interpreters, naturally tend to make the invisible institution responsible for the actions of this private enterprise.
Whatever the source of the particular missions, it is obvious that
Belyj's and Kafka's heroes live in a world dominated by a hidden, inaccessible power. A challenge to this power is doomed to failure. The
story of Belyj's novel is the story of failed revolution, that of Kafka's
novels the story of failed quest. Kafka's protagonists are trying to gain
access to the invisible power by repeated, obstinate attempts. But the
structure of the invisible world is such that these attempts fail by necessity. Both the castle and the Court are infinite; 9 it is physically impossible for Kafka's heroes, who live in a finite time and space, to explore the infinite expanses of the invisible world. The invisible world
of the modern myth surrenders neither to a rebel nor to an explorer.

5. The Restoration of the Supernatural?
The visible/invisible world of the modern myth has been created
as a secularized counterpart of the classical myth. The secularization
is radical in Kafka's version: there are no supernatural beings, no miracles happen, in the fictional worlds of The Trial and The Castle. The
invisible domain is a world of human institutions, of a Court, of an
administrative office. To be sure, the inhabitants of the visible domain are faced with interventions of the same intensity, arrogance,

Modern Myth
and unpredictability as were the humans in the mythological world.
Kafka's visible/invisible world is a myth precisely because it highlights
the contrast between a human and an antihuman world. However,
no supernatural explanation or justification is posited. The antihuman world is operated by the humans themselves, the alien forces are
nothing other than the mysterious, perverse ingredients of human
nature and societal organization. Kafka's Court and castle are radical
versions of Dicken's Circumlocution Office (III.2.1) . 10
In Belyj's Petersburg, the supernatural does not seem to be fully
eliminated. The shadows emerging from and disappearing into the
mist resemble phantoms. And, indeed, in the streets of Petersburg
phantoms appear. The existence of phantoms would radically affect
the semantic structure of th/ fictional world and the pattern of control: intervening through the domain of shadows, a supernatural domain would be the ultimate controlling force in Belyj's fictional
world.
One phantom of Petersburg, the Christ image, represents a universal, religious supernatural; this phantom, however, is a passing figure.
The main role of the satanistic Sisnarfne is to provide a striking interpretation of "our capital city'': having no visible administration,
Petersburg is ruled by shadows of ambiguous ontological status. The
most active phantom, indeed, the driving force of the conflict between the power and the revolution, is familiar to all students of
Russian literature and history: the Bronze Horseman created by
Alexander Puskin. His intertextual reappearance links the events of
1905 with the Russian past, presenting them as just one episode in the
protracted conflict between the authoritarian government and a
lonely, desperate rebel. But in Belyj's radical reinterpretation the
phantom of Russian history is not an enemy but an ally of the rebel.
The Bronze Horseman impels Dudkin to the final, liberating act,
which symbolizes the end of tyranny.
Is, then, Belyj's fictional world a return to the classical myth-is
the capital of Russia split between the natural world and the netherworld? The answer to this question must be negative. Sklovskij noticed that in Belyj's work, "fantastic events are now asserted, now dis197

INTENSIONAL

FUNCTIONS

claimed" (1929, 214). The phantoms of Petersburg dissolve in the city's
permanent fog or transform into natural beings or objects. Belyj's
text suggests, but does not authenticate, the supernatural. The supernatural is not a domain of the world structure but rather an interpretive hypothesis: the events of the fictional world are so confusing and
incomprehensible that they could be of supernatural origin. Yet the
modern myth refuses to confirm this hypothesis.
The appearance of the phantom of Russian history in Petersburg is
a telling symptom of the strict localization of Belyj's modern myth.
St. Petersburg might be a city of shadows, but it is St. Petersburg, the
capital of imperial Russia at a turning point of its history, at the time
of the revolution of 1905. In contrast, the settings of Kafka's narratives
have no names (VII.2); the Court and the castle could be located
anywhere and everywhere. 11 It seems to me that a significant distinction between the two versions of the modern myth comes into sight.
Kafka, in the tradition of Western culture, created a universal, abstract, anthropic modern myth; Belyj, deeply immersed in the Russian cultural tradition, produced a national modern myth, a myth of
Russia and of its historical destiny.
The modern myth in both of its variants is the product of the secular culture of the twentieth century. Human actions, and, especially,
the activities of social institutions, are incomprehensible, but a transcendent, supernatural explanation is either no longer available or
lacks authenticity. The senselessness of human actions and historical
conflicts, the daily encounters with the bizarre, cannot be explained
and redeemed by recourse to divine or demonic forces. The modern
myth restates the precariousness of the human condition that the classical myth stated. But now that the gods are dead, humans themselves
are responsible for the chaotic world they have created and operate.

I

Epilogue
Fictional Worlds in Transduction:
Postmodernist Rewrites

Literature is a historically evolving activity, and so are its constructs,
fictional worlds. Fictional-worlds theory, to which this book has been
devoted, must lead out into the history of fictional worlds. Others
will write this history. I can do no more than conclude this book with
a few observations about the most conspicuous historical connections
between fictional worlds.

I.

lntertextuality

The links that bind particular literary works in succession have
been traditionally examined under the heading of influence. More recently, this concept has been seriously questioned and displaced by
the idea of intertextuality. 1 In the original, radical formulations (Kristeva 1969; Barthes 1971), intertextuality was posited as a universal,
absolute property of texts, as "the very condition of textuality"
(Hutcheon 1989, 8). But this conception is so broad as to be theoretically vacuous and analytically useless. Moreover, absolute intertextualists see only one side of the coin: the entry of extant textual material into the formation of successor texts. They do not see what is done
with this material, how it is shaped, how it is integrated into the new
199

HETEROCOSMICA

text's totality. 2 Hutcheon has identified the intratexts and intertexts
of Kurt Vonegut's Slaughterhouse Five and of E. L. Doctorow's Ragtime, thus giving us a precise image of these novels' discursive complexity (1989, 9-10, 21-22). But this positioning of the novels within
the web of intertextuality does not explain their character as individualized and identifiable literary works, the one Vonnegut's, the other
Doctorow's. Intratexts and intertexts, like all material absorbed into
a work, submit to the principles of the new creation. The intratextual
and intertextual ingredients interact in complex ways, but there is order in this chaos, the order of the emergent literary structure. Absolutized intertextuality does away not only with the originality but also
with the historicity ofliterary texts, making them all just ripples in an
anonymous intertextual flow.
The impasse of absolute intertextuality is well expressed in Culler's
resigned complaint: "By its very nature, perhaps, the description of
intertextuality can only be accomplished by projects that distort and
restrict the original theoretical program" (1981, u8). This "distortion''
is, in fact, beneficial: it allows us to break out of the infinite regress,
in which absolute intertextuality is trapped, and view intertextuality
not as an immutable law but as a historically changing factor of literary text production. There are periods when literary texts are "oriented toward intertextuality'' [mit Einstellung auf lntertextualitat]
(Lachmann 1990, 60); in other periods, intertextuality is not a significant factor of text production; in yet others, it leaves more or less noticeable traces.
It is this way out of the impasse that enabled Culler and a cohort
of literary detectives to analyze intertextuality, to uncover traces of
texts in other texts. Riffaterre's studies were the model to be followed:
he preserved the broad conception of intertextuality but at the same
time converted it into an analytical procedure "to achieve greater interpretive certainty'' (Clayton and Rothstein 1991, 23). Riffaterre differentiates two sources of intertextuality: particular texts and universal cultural stock ("sociolect") (1978, 1-22). 3 Gautier's line, "Drawing
the people through the desert after her" [Trainant dans le desert les

200

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
peuples apres elle], is intertextually linked to a line from a particular
work, Racine's Phedre: "Drawing all hearts after him" [Trainant tous
les coeurs apres soi]. Universal intertextuality shapes the meaning of
the word "armoire" in one of Eluard's poems: "The French sociolect
makes it the place for hoarding within the privacy of the home ....
Pere Goriot mispronounces it ormoire, the place for or, for gold, for
treasure" (1978, u, 3).
It is becoming apparent that intertextual analysis differs from influence study in that it is focused on semantic interpretation. The notion of influence is strictly unidirectional, it designates the irradiation
of chronologically preceding texts toward succeeding texts. Because
of this chronological succession we can claim that, for example, Byron influenced Puskin or Dostoevsky influenced Camus, but the reverse is not true. lntertextuality is bidirectional; it is a sharing of semantic traces in texts irrespective of their chronological order.
Through intertextuality, texts are bound together in a relationship of
mutual semantic illumination.
Explicit intertextuality, quotation in particular, is of minor interest for literary study; the real challenge is implicit intertextuality, semantic traces of hidden intertexts. This kind of intertextuality is governed by the general conditions of implicitness spelled out in VIl.2.
First, it is marked by allusions, which direct the interpreter from one
literary text to other texts, to artworks, and so on (Preminger 1974,
18; Ben-Porat 1976; Amossy 1980). Second, it follows the basic rule of
the semantic interpretation of implicitness: the text's meaning can be
grasped without identifying the intertext but is enriched, often quite
substantially, by its discovery. As we know already, the "unilateral dependence" creates indeterminacy in semantic interpretation: radical
disagreements about intertextual meaning are very common, indeed,
necessary.
lntertextuality has been treated as a property of texture: intertextual meaning resides in words, phrases, quotes, cliches, and the like.
In terms of our semantics, this intertextuality is a constituent of the
text's intensional meaning. 4 But for a literary semantics that reinstates

201

HETEROCOSMICA

reference in general and fictional reference in particular, the purely
intensional conception of intertextuality, despite its appeal and relevance, is insufficient. Literary works are linked not only on the level
of texture but also, and no less importantly, on the level of fictional
worlds. 5 I have emphasized repeatedly in this book that fictional
worlds gain a semiotic existence independent of the constructing texture; they thereby become objects of the active, evolving, and recycling cultural memory. They enter into their own chain of succession,
complementing and reinforcing or competing and undermining one
another. They move from one fiction maker to another, from one period to another, from one culture to another as extensional entities,
while their original texture, style, modes of narration, and authentication have been forgotten. A fictional world is more memorable
than the texture that brought it into existence. I think that readers
will be hard pressed if asked about the narrative mode and style of
Madame Bovary; but they will never forget the tragic fate of Emma
Bovary. This explains why intensional intertextuality, as stated earlier,
is primarily implicit, whereas the succession of fictional worlds is almost always explicit, often emphatically so.
2. Literary Transduction

lntertextuality and fictional-world succession -confirm the need for
a two-pronged semantics presented in this book: literary works are
linked on both the intensional and the extensional level. I use the
term literary transduction to encompass both kinds of lineage. Literary transduction thus supersedes and absorbs intertextuality.
The concept ofliterary transduction is an outgrowth of the idea of
literature as a specific form of communication. The idea has been
hinted at in the prologue (Pr.4), and now is the time to make it more
definite. In a rudimentary representation, borrowed from the general
theory of communication, literary communication is a simple transmission of information: an author (sender) produces a text (message)
destined for a reader (receiver).

202

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
Schema 6

~-----11►~ ~-----1►►~
This conception has two major faults from the viewpoint of literary
semantics: first, it presumes that reading is a passive "decoding" of the
text, and, second, it does not notice that a fictional world is transmitted through the message.
I propose to replace the conventional schema 6 with schema 7,
which takes into account these two critical comments.
Schema7
~

writes

reads

~

~ ----I►► ~--r--T,-e-xt_-,--, ◄◄-----~

W(F)

The new model, which echoes the principles of fictional-world accessibility (Pr.2.3), represents lite~ary communication as interaction:
in the act of writing the author produces a text and thereby constructs a fictional world; in the act of reading, the reader processes the
text and thereby reconstructs the fictional world. Both the author
and the reader perform communicative acts. But let us reemphasize

203

1

11
[It==:
t
_g

constructs

~I
{
~

1

l

err==
"' t
reoomtt=

constructs

-~ I

rn

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
that these acts are not equivalent but complementary. While highlighting the active role of the reader, we insist on the asymmetry of
control in literary communication. The author is responsible for text
production and world construction; his text functions as a kind of
score in which the fictional world is inscribed. The reader's text processing and world reconstruction follow the instructions of the score.
To be sure, nobody can prevent actual readers from reading however
they please and from using the text for whatever purpose they wish.
But an individualistic ethics of reading, which grants the readers this
license, is not a theory of reading.
This brief restatement of the principles ofliterary communication
should suffice here, because I want to do something else with schema
7. I want to develop it into schema 8, from which we can read off the
concept of literary transduction.
Transduction takes the literary work beyond the communicative
act into an open, unlimited chain of transmission. The prototype of
literary transduction is translation, and it was Jiri Levy's schema of
translating (Levy 1963) that inspired schema 8. According to Levy,
translating creates "a complex literary communication chain in which
the result of one message becomes the starting point of another message" (1963, 37). The translator, who received the original text from
its author, transforms the text into another language and thus becomes a second sender, making the text accessible to foreign readers.
I have already indicated how the act of translation should be understood within our two-pronged semantics (STII.1). The translator
cannot render precisely the intensional meaning of the original texture, because the form of expression in the target language differs
from that of the original language. But he or she is able, indeed, has
the duty, to preserve the fictional world in its extensional structuring
and, as far as possible, in its intensional structuring as well. Thus, for
example, an English translator of Kafka's Der Prozess or a German
translator of Defoe's Robinson Crusoe has to render not only the specific extensional world structures of the two novels but also their
unique intensional structuring resulting from the function of naming
(see STil.2).
205

HETEROCOSMICA

3. Postmodernist Rewrite
These restrictions apply because of the nature of translating; the
rewriting of fictional worlds is not subject to them. On the contrary,
the protoworld can be transformed quite radically, and therefore the
successor world can be linked to it in diverse relationships. I propose
to explore the semantic potential of rewriting by examining its most
topical manifestation, the postmodernist rewrites of classic literary
works. 6 In rewriting a classic work the postmodernist writer not only
rejuvenates the past Qauss 1978, 3rn) but also challenges it. Postmodernist critical theory questions and "corrects" the established, inherited literary canon. Postmodernist rewrites of classic works pursue the
same goal by literature's own means: they confront the canonical protoworld by constructing a new, alternative fictional world. Yet the
challenge returns, like a boomerang, to benefit postmodernism. As
Hutcheon has observed, the postmodernist irony "does indeed mark
the difference from the past, but the intertextual echoing simultaneously works to affirm ... the connection with the past" (1989, 5). At
a time of radical violations of norms, categories, and modes of narrative, the rewrite appropriates the classic work's well-spun story, its
popular characters, and, in some cases, its familiar setting. In other
words, the rewrite not only confronts the canonical fictional world
with contemporary aesthetic and ideological postulates but also provides the reader with a familiar space within the strange landscapes of
radical postmodernist experimentation.
All postmodernist rewrites redesign, relocate, reevaluate the classic
protoworld. Undoubtedly, this remaking is motivated by political factors, in the wide, postmodernistic sense of "politics."7 Yet the politics
of fiction making operates by diverse strategies, so that at least three
distinct types of rewrites can be posited:
a. Transposition preserves the design and the main story of the
protoworld but locates them in a different temporal or spatial setting,
or both. The protoworld and the successor world are parallel but the
rewrite tests the topicality of the canonical world by placing it in a
new, usually contemporary, historical, political, and cultural context.
206

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
b. Expansion extends the scope of the protoworld, by filling its
gaps, constructing a prehistory or posthistory, and so on. The protoworld and the successor world are complementary. The protoworld
is put into a new co-text, and the established structure is thus shifted.
c. Displacement constructs an essentially different version of the
protoworld, redesigning its structure and reinventing its story. These
most radical postmodernist rewrites create polemical antiworlds,
which undermine or negate the legitimacy of the canonical protoworld.
This typology of postmodernist rewrites is no more than a preliminary orientation in a varied and constantly changing terrain.
Three popular postmodernist novels give us the opportunity to see
the different strategies of rewriting at work and in their results.
3.1. The politics of politics. Ulrich Plenzdorf's short novel The
New Sufferings ofYoung W [Die neuen Leiden des jungen W.] (1973)
is a rewrite ofJohann Wolfgang von Goethe's. The Sufferings ofYoung
Werther [Die Leiden des jungen Werther]. Immediately after its appearance, the "cult novel" of the sentimental age became a source for
imitation and a target for parody (see Blessin 1985, 58-60; Engel 1986;
Swales 1987, 98-rno). In fact, Goethe himself can be credited with
initiating the rewriting process when, in 1787, he published a substantially revised version of the 1774 original. During the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries an industry of "Wertheriaden" prospered. In
Germany, Werther became a puppet manipulated by the vagaries of
German politics (attracting even such a "prominent" author as Joseph
Goebbels) Qager 1984, 35). In a sense, then, Plenzdorf's novel is just
the most recent stage in the transduction history of Werther; like many
of its predecessors, its fictional world exudes the spirit of recent German political history. 8
In terms of our typology, Plenzdorf's rewrite is a transposition:
Werther's tragic story is transferred from a German principality at the
end of the eighteenth century to the German Democratic Republic
of the 1960s. But the relationship between the original and the
rewrite is more complex than this typological labeling indicates. In a

207

HETEROCOSMICA

typically postmodernist turn, Plenzdorf both appropriates and actualizes the classic work.9
The similarity and difference between the respective narrative acts
give us the first clue to the bonds between the two works: Plenzdorf's
is a text after death (VI.3.3) in a literal sense, Goethe's in a metaphorical sense. Plenzdorf's narrator, Wiebeau, has to dispatch his narrative
from "beyond the Jordan" (16; 7), since everything that he has created
during his short life has been destroyed. Werther's letters are saved
from destruction or oblivion thanks to an editor who publishes them
after Werther's death. In both cases, the fictional world is constructed
primarily by the protagonist's Ich-narrative; but, also in both cases,
additional text sources are activated. Goethe's editor is not a mere
mediator ofWerther's letters; he supplements the protagonist's narrative and constructs important episodes of his story, especially his final
decline and end, gathering information from first-hand witnesses:
Lotte, Albert, Werther's servants, and others (''.Allocution'' to the
reader in the first edition of the novel, 131) (see Flaschka 1987, 185).
Plenzdorf's dead narrator is able not only to write a text but also to
listen to and comment on the communications between persons still
living, following his father, who searches for information about his
son's life and death. The participants and witnesses whom the father
meets construct alternative versions of certain episodes ofWiebeau's
story. Yet the authentication force of Edgard's narrative is not thereby
diminished, not only because he is the Ich-narrator but also because
the posthumous dating of his narrative act endows it with sincerity
and objectivity of distance.
Goethe's text appears in the fictional world of Plenzdorf's hero
quite by chance, as an anonymous livre trouve. It first becomes part of
Plenzdorf's texture in the simplest and most explicit form of intertextuality, ·as quotation (collected on Edgard's tapes to Willi and
given to Edgard's father after his son's death). 10 The quotations intrude into Wiebeau's !ch-narrative as intertext from a remote era, expressing an alien sensibility and written in an "impossible'' style.
Werther's letters sound ridiculous to Edgard, for whom "real" literature is Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye, the "cult novel" of the 1960s.

208

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
Yet the character of intertextuality changes radically, when the protagonist-narrator discovers that Werther's words can be used as a
rhetorical weapon in his struggle for love and freedom (see Brenner
1982a, 26; Weimann 1982, 166); by firing his "Werther-Pistol," he
leaves Charlie speechless, "knocks out" her fiance and outrages his
boss, Addi. Only Edgard's friend Zaremba is not stunned but is able
to understand Goethe's "Old High German" (99; 55). 11
The rhetorical use of the Werther quotations links Goethe's and
Plenzdorf's novels in explicit intertextuality. But in a postmodernist
rewrite, as I have argued in Ep.2, intertextuality is just an auxiliary
factor of a deeper historical and semantic link, the fictional world
transduction. 12 In Plenzdorf's novel, the cooperation of intertextuality and world transduction is very smooth, as exemplified by a telling
leitmoti£ The device is first formed intratextually: when Werther sees
the farmhand ("Bauernbursch'') under arrest for murder, he establishes a connection with him by conjugating the officer's phrase: "He
cannot be saved" [Er ist nich zu retten]; "You cannot be saved, unfortunate man! I well see that we cannot be saved" [Du hist nicht zu retten, Ungliicklicher! Ich sehe wohl, dass wir nicht zu retten sind]
(99; 109-10; emphasis added). The intratextual device becomes intertextual when Wiebeau, commenting on Werther's fate, resumes the
phrase: "He could not be helped" [Dem war nicht zu helfen] (19; 36).
Finally, in her conversation with Edgard's father, Charlie applies the
same phrase to Edgard and repeats it three times (with slight variations): "Edgard could not be helped" [Edgard war ja nicht zu helfen]
(40; 73). Quite spontaneously, as it were, intratextuality and intertextuality link Werther's, the farmhand's, and Wiebeau's tragic stories.13
Plenzdorf's most striking intertextual coup comes when he forces
Goethe's text to play a performative function in his rewrite. Goethe's
text becomes a means of Plenzdorf's fictional-world construction.
When Charlie's fiance returns from military service, Edgard reports
the event to Willi, using Goethe's construction of Albert's return:
"Enou~h, Wilhelm: the betrothed is here! ... Fortunately I was not
present to witness his reception! That would have rent my heart" (72;
40). The fictional world of The New Sufferings thus issues from two
209

HETEROCOSMICA

textures, the colloquial, slangy, ironic style of Wiebeau and the affective, hyperbolic, and syntactically ornate style of Werther. The two
textures create two intensionally differentiated domains within Plenzdorf's fictional world, one mirroring the world of eighteenth-century sentimentalism, the other expressing the sensibility of the r96os.
The performative intertext is the most intimate fusion of the canonical work with its rewrite: two closely parallel fictional worlds are thus
created.
The macrostructural affinities of the parallel worlds can be readily
observed when comparing the groups of the principal acting persons.
The constellations are a perfect match in the extensional structure. Yet
there are significant divergences in the naming of the protagonists:
Wiebeau instead of Werther, Charlie instead of Charlotte (Lotte),
Willi instead of Wilhelm, Dieter instead of Albert. With the exception
of the last case, the rewrite uses non-German forms, Charlie and
Willi adopted from English, Wiebeau from French. 14 This intensional
shift signals a change in the cultural and historical anchoring of the
fictional world. The youth culture of The New Sufferings is cosmopolitan, in contrast to the provincial German culture of the
canonical prototext.
While the homology of the agential constellation is the most obvious, the similarity of modal macrostructing is the most powerful semantic link between the classic and the postmodernist works.
Werther perceives that the world is severely constrained by the very
conditions of human existence. In other words, his is a world of
a/ethic restrictions (V.2). 15 Humanity is "imprisoned within walls,"
"the active, inquiring energies of man'' are severely hampered, "all our
efforts have no other aim than to satisfy our needs which in turn
serve no other purpose than to prolong our wretched existence" (7-8;
30). In the world of alethic constrains, given and unchangeable, human activity is either banal or senseless. In contradistinction, Plenzdorf shapes Wiebeau's fictional world by deontic restrictions, imposed
by the totalitarian requirements of social conformity (V.3). 16 These
requirements are expressed implicitly, in Wiebeau's sarcastic renarrating of an anonymous socialist realistic film. The film's protagonist is
210

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
a reformed criminal who finds satisfaction and personal happiness in
adjusting to social norms. But it is the protagonist's nonconformist
brother who holds Wiebeau's sympathy: "I understood him completely" (41;22). Goethe's classic novel, the socialist-realist film, and
Plenzdorf's postmodernist rewrite form a politically loaded triangle
of world transduction.
The different modal restrictions that Goethe's and Plenzdorf's
protagonists experience determine the similarities and differences in
their character and fate. They both are rebels, trying, each in his own
way, to break out of the constraints governing their worlds. Werther's
is a rebellion of sentiment; he retires from the gloomy world of human existence into the inner world of his heart. Putting himself in
contrast to "a man of reason" [Mann des Verstandes] ,. Werther emphasizes that it is his heart "which is my only pride, it alone is the
source of everything, all my strength, all my bliss [Seligkeit] and all
my misery'' (74; 86). His heart is filled with "the sweet feeling of freedom," the serenity [Heiterkeit] of the beauty of nature, the joy of
communion with children, and, last but not least, the agony of love.
Wiebeau, who lives in a world of societal restrictions, is a cultural
rebel. Rejecting the role of a well-adjusted "model boy," he chooses a
semilegal existence in the youth counterculture, mocking the official
social representations, apotheosizing the jeans, listening to rock music, painting abstract pictures. Across two centuries, the canonical
and the postmodernist work share not only a world of restrictions but
also its inevitable progeny-the nonconformist and rebel.
Werther is primarily a mind, a mind dominated by strong passions (Leidenschaften).17 His passions, like those of Dostoevsky's fictional persons (III.1.3), are beyond his control and thus prone to
sudden and extreme swings from euphoria to dysphoria. The sentimental hero is in a state of permanent emotional turmoil. Fleeing
from erotic passion, he tries to engage in rational practical activity;
but this short episode only turns his existential angst into complete
alienation. In a rare letter to Lotte he writes: "I liv[e] among strange
people, utterly alien to my heart .... I do not rightly know why I
rise, why I go to bed" (64; 77-78). As his heart loses the power of
211

HETEROCOSMICA

world creation, he becomes a patient in the grip of an uncontrollable
depression. He returns to Lotte without purpose, without hope. His
final act has often been commented upon, but it is worth pointing
out its paradoxical motivational character: the self-destruction of a
man driven by passion is a carefully prepared and ideologically justified rational act of escape, an act of liberation from the alethic restrictions of his world. In this respect, Werther's mode of acting is like
that of Dostoevsky's Raskolnikov, not like Rogozin's. 18
Wiebeau never doubts that life is worth living and never contemplates ending it voluntarily. While Werther is a child of the age of suffering, Wiebeau is a child of the age of doing. Death comes to him as
a tragic, absurd accident, caused by his eagerness to accomplish. But
let us not overlook one important similarity between Werther's and
Wiebeau's demise. After the double failure-in love and in activityWiebeau is at the end of his rope and comes to "understand Old
Werther when he said he couldn't continue" (147; 83). Wiebeau could
not and does not cause his own death but, "bad loser" that he is, accepts it as the best ending to his unwinnable rebellion.
To describe Goethe's and Plenzdorf's novels as narratives of failed
rebellion seems to contradict their most common interpretation as
narratives of unrequited erotic passion. But the modal framework,
which has led us thus far, enables us to bring the two strains of
Werther's and Wiebeau's tragedy together. Their passion is hopeless,
because the women they desire have a different attitude toward the
world. Both Lotte and Charlie do not perceive the restrictions, which
are. so strongly experienced by their suitors; rather, they accept the
world as it is and want nothing but to live according to its conventions. Only in a brief, exceptional moment do they succumb to the
elation of"illicit" passion, but this moment is followed by repentance
and final withdrawal. 19 Werther and Wiebeau's loves are unrequited
because they did not find partners who would share their rebellious
stance against the modalities of their worlds.
The role of religion in the fictional worlds of Werther and The
New Sufferings brings our contrastive analysis to its conclusion. God
is still very much present in Werther's doxa, but only as a spiritual
212

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
force of the past, as the creator of the world. At present, he is removed from and unmoved by human suffering and unable or unwilling to give consolation and strength. God is not dead yet, merely
absent; he has stopped communicating with his creatures, he has become "silent" (92; 104). While still believing in a superior being,
Werther feels "deserted" [verlassen] by him. Wiebeau's is a postreligious
world, there is no construct of deity. Paradoxically, in this atheistic
world Wiebeau survives his death in a literary reincarnation made
possible by a radical voiding of mimetic conventions (VI.3.3).
3.2. The politics of madness. At first sight, Jean Rhys's Wide Sargasso Sea (1966) is just a prehistory of Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre
(1847). It narrates what happened to Rochester before he met Janehow he married in the West Indies and why he took his wife back to
England. In this sense, Rhys's story seems to explain Rochester's behavior toward Jane and especially his failed attempt at bigamy. A firm
link between the two worlds and stories is forged by the time overlap
of the final part of Rhys's novel with the narrative ofJane Eyre. 20
Rhys's rewrite is thus the most magic of all transformations that
fiction can accomplish: past made present. What is distant, backgrounded, fragmentary, and ghostly in Jane Eyre becomes close, continuous, human in Wide Sargasso Sea. 21 But this presentation does
not endow the past with more definiteness. On the contrary, Bronte's
world is made of certain fictional facts and absolute values, Rhys's is
full of uncertainties and ambiguities. This seemingly paradoxical aspect of the transformation indicates that the postmodernist rewrite is
not a mere sequel or prequel to Jane Eyre; it supplements the canonical world, but with a world of a different extensional and intensional
structuring.
The most obvious trace of the transformation is a major shift in
the agential constellation. In Jane Eyre, Rochester, although initially
distanced by class difference and position of power, gradually becomes the center of Jane's domain and, consequently, the center of
the novel's fictional world. Even when far away during the Moor
House episode, he is constantly present in Jane's mind, and at a decisive moment she hears his call in a paranormal experience of"clairau213

HETEROCOSMICA

dience" (see Traill 1996, 8). Rochester's first wife, Bertha, is doubly removed from the center of the fictional world, by being a madwoman
and by being incarcerated, isolated in an attic room. She intrudes
into the fictional world only occasionally to spread terror and fear. In
Wide Sargasso Sea, Antoinette (Bertha) moves to the center of the
agential constellation, surrounded by her family (mother Annette,
brother Pierre, Aunt Cora, stepfather Mason, stepbrother Richard),
her maid-friend Christophine, and her nameless husband. Surprisingly, Jane has no counterpart in Rhys's fictional world. 22 The absenting of Jane and the decentering of Rochester is the most telling
evidence of a substantial extensional redesigning ofBronte's world. If
in Jane Eyre the "central confrontation" is between Jane and Bertha
(Gilbert and Gubar 1979, 339), 23 in Wide Sargasso Sea it is between
Antoinette (Bertha) and her husband.
If it is true that "the madwoman in literature by women ... is usually in some sense the author's double, an image of her own anxiety
and rage" (Gilbert and Gubar 1979, 78), then the placing of the
"madwoman'' at the center of the agential constellation means the elevation of the woman/writer into the position of social dignity and
literary authority. But if we accept this allegory we must also accept
that the ultimate objective of Rhys's rewrite is a reevaluation of madness. Rhys "frees the madwoman from the bestiality and lunacy''
(Friedman 1989, u8-19) but, more importantly, constructs a different
causation. In Jane Eyre madness is caused genetically, it is a disease
that runs in the family of Rochester's first wife. That is the only explanation that the reader is given, yet it is worth remembering that he
or she gets it solely from Rochester's subjective account. Rochester
thus can present himself as a victim of a conspiracy between his father and Bertha's stepfather; he was duped into marriage, not informed about the family history of madness.
In Wide Sargasso Sea the construct of madness has also a personal
(Ich-form) origin, but Rhys treats the subjective mode in such a way
(see below) that the reader is able to infer fictional facts. Madness is
construed as a socially conditioned pathology, caused by the colonial
atmosphere, racial conflict, and male domination. These social deter214

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
minants conspire to deprive the heroine of personal identity; unsure
of her place in the world, insecure in all her relationships, forced into
an arranged marriage, deprived of all her property, she lives in constant fear. 24 In a moment of crisis she confesses to Christophine: "I
am so afraid ... I do not know why, but so afraid. All the time" (96).
Antoinette thus relives the fears of her mother, who felt hated, threatened, unsafe. The daughter repeats her mother's history, but this
reenactment is due not to genetic endowment but to the persistence
of the woman's condition. Madness is the limit of the disintegration
of feminine personality in the social environment in which both the
mother and the daughter are forced to live. All that is required to
reach this limit is a traumatic event (the burning down of Coulibri
and the death of her son in the case of Annette, her husband's betrayal in the case of Antoinette) and a performative declaration by
male authority. 2 5
I have mentioned the namelessness of the male protagonist of
Rhys's novel. 26 This textural feature is not the only symptom of organized manipulation of naming. A special intensional function of
naming (STII.2) operates in Rhys's text. The naming of fictional persons is shifty: some of them have two names, others claim names that
may not belong to them, still others are renamed. Christophine's alias
is Josephine, Daniel Cosway "has no right to that name," according
to Antoinette (ro6) and Christophine (129), and, most importantly,
Antoinette is renamed Bertha. Without apparent reason, but exercising his supreme Adamic power, her husband starts calling her the
name that the madwoman in the attic bears in the fictional world of
Jane Eyre. Antoinette perceives the link between her husband's intention and the name-change intension: the renaming is an attempt to
alter her identity: "My name is not Bertha. You are trying to make
me into someone else, calling me by another name" (121).
But the uncertainties of the fictional persons' identity go deeper.
Despite its first-person form, Rhys's novel is polyphonic; the subjective narrators do not control their narratives tightly, other voices,
other perspectives participate in the world construction. This holds
especially true for Christophine, who does not function as a narrator
215

HETEROCOSMICA

but whose voice contributes substantially to the novel's polyphonic
construction (see O'Connor 1986, 145). AB a result, Rhys's fictional
person is not a fixed construct but an overlay of different, often contrary, presentations and projections. Antoinette is for a long time
confused about the character of her husband, but members of her
family are not hesitant. Richard sees him as "an honourable gentleman'' whom he would trust with his own life. In contrast, Aunt Cora
does not like what she has seen of "this honourable gentleman."
"Stiff. Hard as a board and stupid as a foot ... except where his own
interests are concerned" (95). And Christophine does not hide from
him that she considers him a liar, who married Antoinette for her
money and now is unfaithful and cruel to her, "wicked like Satan
self" (124-32). 27
At first sight, Rhys's use of the first-person narrative seems io work
against the refocusing of the fictional world from a male to a female
center. While the Ich-narrative ofJane Eyre has an exclusively feminine source, Rhys's narrative mode achieves a gender balance, since
both Antoinette and her husband participate in the fictional world
construction. But this contrast is spurious. First, the crucial episodes
of Rochester's past in Jane Eyre are presented by the male protagonist,
especially in his embedded narrative in volume 3, chapter 1. Second,
the polyphonic character of Rhys's text allows the reader to make inferences that go beyond or even against the narrators' subjective perspectives. The end result is a world construction where the reader is
presented with the principal witnesses' accounts but is given enough
unmanipulated information to make up his or her own mind about
who is guilty and who is innocent.
Some critics believe that the reading of Wide Sargasso Sea, in a sort
of feedback, could affect the contemporary reader's attitude toward
Bronte's canonical work, especially toward her heroine. But it is a
very crude and superficial reader who "loses sympathy forJane Eyre's
quest, loses faith in the worth of such a quest" (Friedman 1989, 119).
Rhys as a writer and artist is much more subtle: by not including Jane
in her fictional world, she withholds any political reevaluation of her
quest. After all, both Bronte's and Rhys's heroines embody the same
216

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
"characteristically Romantic theme-the struggle of an individual
consciousness towards self-fulfilment" (Lodge 1966, 114).
3.3. The politics of fiction making. Just as Goethe's Werther
launched an industry of "Wertheriades," so did Defoe's Robinson
Crusoe stimulate a never ending series of "Robinsonades"; just as
Plenzdorf's rewrite stands out among the popular reworkings of
Werther, so does J.M. Coetzee's rewrite Foe (1986) among the Robinsonades.28 We come to it at the end of our demonstration of rewrite
types, since it is the most radical type, a politically loaded polemic
against the canonical work. The undermining of the canon begins
with an efficient narrative device: the chronological order of the classic protowork and its postmodernist rewrite is reversed. In Coetzee's
fictional world, the narrative act of Susan Barton precedes Defoe's act
of writing, which created the world and the story of Crusoe as we
know it. Susan's narrative is claimed to be the original, "true" story,
and Defoe's novel thus appears as a distorting rewrite of the prototext.29
Susan constructs the "original" fictional world around a Cruso
who is no culture hero, no builder of a civilization (I.1). He lives in
primitive physical conditions: the only piece of furniture in his flimsy
habitat is a bed (later Susan mentions a "stove built very neatly of
stone" [14]); except for a knife, "all tools on the island were of wood
or stone" (15). He does not keep a calendar and, last but not least,
does not write. Cruso cannot be a culture hero because he has no desire, no motivation, to improve his primitive existence. When Susan
suggests that they explore the shipwreck and, perhaps, "save from it
tools of the greatest utility," he replies: "We have a roof over our heads,
made without saw or axe. We sleep, we eat, we live. We have no need
of tools" (32). Cruso seems to be content in his isolation and altogether uninterested in the world beyond his island: "It was as though
he wished his story to begin with his arrival on the island, and mine
to begin with my arrival, and the story of us together to end on the
island too" (34). To be sure, Cruso has been engaged for years in an
ambitious project-building gigantic terraces-a project he undertook with the express purpose ofleaving behind a legacy (18). But for

HETEROCOSMICA

him the terraces are useless, because he has no seeds to turn them into
fertile fields. Thus, in the best case, Cruso prepares the ground for a
future civilization: "The planting is reserved for those who come after us and have the foresight to bring seed" (33). Cruso left no record
of his stay on the island, and his laconic reminiscences are full of contradictions that, in the end, Susan does not know "what was truth,
what was lies, and what was mere rambling" (12).
Cruso's death on his involuntary return to England definitely separates the story from its most authentic potential source. With Friday
mute, Susan is in a privileged position: she has at her disposal "all
that Cruso leaves behind, which is the story of his island" (45). But
the recipients, Foe in the first place, will accept the story only if Susan can convince them of her authentication authority. To this end
she first pursues, quite naturally, the mimetic strategy: authenticate
the narrative by knowledge of the facts and by a commitment to
telling the "truth." As her narrative progresses, however she learns
that miming a truthful report of personal experience does not necessarily result in an acceptable story. A dull existence yields a dull story.
So Susan turns from mimesis to convention, adopting the narrative
poetics spelled out, explicitly and implicitly, by the master narrator,
Foe: a story needs a structure and a dose of thrill, adventure, and
moral. 3 Following the master's poetics, Susan discovers that she is as
skillful as he is in giving shape to the story and providing it with
"philosophical" interpretations. She replaces Foe, occupies his table,
writes with his pen on his paper, and puts the pages she has written
into his chest. Her narrative invests the story of "the Female Castaway'' with as many "strange circumstances" (67) as the master could
desire. Assuming by fiat the conventional authentication force, Susan
is free not only to invent fictional fact but also to create gaps: "It is
. . . in my power to guide and amend. Above all, to withhold" (123).
Susan displaced the male author, but at a high price-by abandoning her own poetics of "telling the truth'' and submitting to his
"sellable" narrative conventions. She gives up reinterpreting the
mythology of poiesis and no longer desires "a man Muse, a youthful
god who visited authoresses in the night and made their pens flow."

°

218

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
She continues using a sexist name for the creative act: she is "father"
to her story, just as the male writer is. Ultimately, she accepts submission to the man/author: "I was not intended to be the mother of
my story, but to beget it. It is not I who am the intended, but you"
(126). Somehow, fate itself has selected (de)Foe to be the father of
Cruso(e)'s story.3 1
The struggle for the authenticating pen does not end with Susan's
accepting the secondary role of the story begetter. A handicapped author seems to be coming into his own at the end of Coetzee's novel.
Replacing Susan at Foe's table, Friday "with Foe's robes on his back
and Foe's wig [is] poised over Foe's papers.... [He] held a quill with
a drop of black ink glistening at its tip" (151). Surprisingly, the master
does not protest against this occupation of his place; on the contrary,
he prevents Susan from snatching away Friday's "tools": "It is part of
learning to write" (151). In a symbolic, unfinished gesture, Foe's authenticating quill passes from Susan to Friday.
But there will be a major difference between Friday's writing and
that of his "predecessors." He is mute, he has no articulated speech,
therefore his writing will be the primary, indeed, the sole, means of
world construction. Friday's will be an absolute writing similar to
God's.3 2 Bypassing speech, his narrative will be a direct, unmediated
transcript of his memory. It will be the "true" record that Susan was
trying to write but abandoned. In the successive displacements of
world-creating authority-which is the story of Coetzee's Foe-Friday is the final "intended" author. Deprived of speech, unaware of
narrative conventions, indifferent to criticism, the liberated slave will
imprint his version of the world, his version of the story, on paper,
without interference of established poetics, without self-serving ambition, without commercial considerations. Here, finally, is a future
author who will write down truth, and nothing but the truth .
We cannot make any pronouncement on the fate of this future author, if we do not first tackle a puzzling aspect of Foe's fictional world.
Every reader and critic of Coetzee's novel knows that in a somewhat
weird, incongruous manner episodes drawn from Defoe's Roxana are
injected into its fictional world. A girl appears (accompanied by a
219

HETEROCOSMICA

nanny) who claims to be Susan's lost daughter and to bear her name.
One is tempted to say that Coetzee's Foe is a double rewrite-of both
Robinson Crusoe and Roxana. But if we examine the global role of the
Roxana episodes, we perceive that they form a metafictional layer in
the world structure of Foe. It is, in fact, Susan who has already assigned this status to the girl from Roxana, when she refused her legitimacy. She recognizes that the girl is a being from a "different order,"
one who had no mother but was "fathered" by the fiction maker, Foe.
The infusion of metafiction into the fictional world of Foe is
closely tied to the struggle for authentication authority. If beings
from different ontological orders co-occur, then the ontological status of all inhabitants of the fictional world is problematized. Who is
the author and who is the authored, who is the fiction maker and
who is a fictional being? Susan refers to the actual-world persons as
"substantial beings" (131). But if such persons-among whom she
counts herself, Foe, and Friday-can meet, interact, and communicate with persons who arrived from a fictional world, how can they
be substantial, how can they be actual? When Susan poses this question, she shows great talent for possible-worlds thinking: either the
girl and her companion (nanny) are from a "different order" or her
own "substantive order" is not what it seemed: "I thought I was myself and this girl a creature from another order speaking words you
made up for her. But now I am full of doubt. Nothing is left to me
but doubt. I am doubt itself Who is speaking me? Am I a phantom
too? To what order do I belong? And you: who are you?" (133). Susan
is in doubt and confused, because in her fictional world the most
crucial world divide is obliterated. The absorption of the fiction
maker into the fictional world, typical of metafiction (VI.4), erases
the boundary that in the actual world exists between the author and
his fictional creations. And the congregation of fictional persons from
different "houses" of the creator erases boundaries between fictional
worlds. When Susan meets the girl from another fictional world, she
experiences the anxiety of an actual person who suspects that he or
she is authored fiction.
In such a world, is there any hope for Friday to finish his appren220

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
ticeship, to become author? The last, obscure chapter of the novel
gives a doubly confusing answer to this question. Yet another, anonymous, narrating "I"-obviously a fictional counterpart of the actual
author-appears and enters Daniel Defoe's house. He finds a girl, Susan, and Foe, all dead. Yet there is still life in Friday, and "from his
mouth, without a breath, issue the sounds of the island" (154). On
the second entrance, Friday seems to be dead as well: ''Above his
neck-I had not observed this before-is a scar like a necklace, left
by a rope or chain" (155). But now the visiting author finds in Foe's
dispatch box the yellowed manuscript of Susan's narrative. Or, at least
it seems to be that manuscript, but only in its first sentence. After
that sentence, the narrative is totally rewritten, supposedly by the visiting author: he does not reach "the dark cliffs of the island" but sinks
under the sea, into the shipwreck, which might be the seat of the sea
monster (kraken) and is "the home of Friday." Here are the bodies of
Susan Barton, of the captain, and of Friday. In his home, Friday also
seems to be dead, but when the author opens his mouth, "from inside him comes a slow stream, without breath, without interruption.
... It runs northward and southward to the ends of the earth"
(155-57).
I quote in some detail from this short part in order to attempt
what some critics have thought impossible: to make sense of it. Indeed, the text makes no sense if read as constructing a standard fictional world. But it is comprehensible if we realize that in the last
part of Foe, Coetzee's radical fiction making proceeds beyond ontological contradictions of metafiction to logical contradictions of an
impossible world. Friday is alive/Friday is dead, once in Foe's house,
once at the bottom of the sea; Susan lies dead in Foe's bed/Susan floats
dead in the shipwreck with "her dead captain"; Susan reaches the island and writes her narrative/Susan does not reach the island and does
not write anything; the manuscript is written by Susan/the manuscript is written by the anonymous "posthumous" author, and so on.
Why all this heavy semantic bombardment of the reader? Perhaps
for one reason only: Friday is a possible author, but in an impossible
world, in a world whose signs do not signify, whose stories are full of
221

HETEROCOSMlCA

contradictions, whose authors give up authority. 33 What issues from
Friday's mouth "without breath, without interruption" and reaches
"to the ends of the earth'' is sound not sign, event not narrative. But
let us not rejoice too loudly for finding an interpretation that makes
sense. It should not go unnoticed that the metafictional and impossible character of the fictional world of Foe is underdetermined and,
therefore, open to other interpretations. Such scenes as the Epping
Forest episode and the visits to the houses of dead in the final part are
constructed with a degree of opaqueness and discontinuity that sug4
gests a dreamlike world (see Penner 1989, 126; Spivak 1991, 165-66).3
Never mind that such a "naturalization" does not eliminate the paradoxes and contradictions of Foes fictional-world structure; it makes
them palatable for a mimetically conditioned reader.

4. Impossible Worlds?
Fiction thrives on the contingency of worlds, emphatically asserted by the idea of possible worlds: every world and every entity in
the world could be or could have been different from what it is. Postmodernist rewrites grow in this fertile semantic ground. They come
into existence because every fictional world, however canonical, however authoritative, however habitualized, can be changed, can be displaced by an alternative world. The complexity of the rewrite's meaning and its challenge to semantic interpretation is due precisely to the
fact that it refers not only to its own fictional world but also, in various ways and degrees, to its source, the protoworld. One can imagine
a reader who reads Wide Sargasso Sea without ever having read or
heard ofJane Eyre or reads the earlier work in ignorance of the later. 35
One can imagine a world where all copies of Robinson Crusoe have
been destroyed and all memory of the book erased but Foe has survived and continues to be read. But these are either exceptional cases
or mere thought experiments. In the standard case of semantic processing the reader of, say, Foe reconstructs the fictional world of Coetzee's novel, but at the same time he or she activates as cognitive
background the fictional encyclopedia of Robinson Crusoe. The se222

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
mantic processing of the rewrite is thus quite similar to that of a historical novel: when reading War and Peace, the reader both reconstructs the fictional person Napoleon and activates the corresponding
entry of his or her actual-world encyclopedia. The semantics of the
rewrite is governed by the principle of "unilateral dependence"
(VIl.2), which applies to all signs that combine explicit (overt) and
implicit (covert) meaning: their meaning is enriched by the recovery
of the unexpressed signifier but is not necessarily dependent on this
recovery.
I agree with the critics who see in postmodernist rewrites a challenge to canonical works. But contemporary ideological criticism
overemphasizes the "rupturing," "subversive revision," "delegitimation" of the "master narrative" (see Friedman 1989, passim). To this
kind of radical critique we have to respond simply by saying that
there is no such thing as falsification in the realm of fiction. The
rewrite does not invalidate or eradicate the canonical protoworld. Just
as Wide Sargasso Sea stands on its own as an autonomous fictional
world, so has and will Jane Eyre. The rewrite enriches, expands, the
universe of fiction, without deleting the extant world; it takes its
place alongside the canonical protoworld, and, hopefully, itself will
enter the canon. We have observed that a rewrite can be a radical
polemic against the canonical work. Yet I can imagine Coetzee having a drink with Defoe, Charlotte Bronte having tea with Jean Rhys,
Plenzdorf going on a pilgrimage to visit Goethe in Weimar. This fictional symposium of fiction makers might seem naive in a time that
stresses radical ruptures. But why would a writer engage in rewriting
. if he or she were not aware of the continuity of poietic activity? The
existence of the postmodernist rewrite supports a view ofliterary history that is "sensitive to both the forces of stability and those of subversion" and that can demonstrate "how the multilayered organization of temporality makes possible both artistic permanence and
evolution" (Pavel 1990, 354).
Hutcheon (1996, 213, 216-17) has suggested that the postmodernist rewrite violates the principle of compossibility (defined in
Pr.2.2): in its agential constellation we find persons from different on223

HETEROCOSMICA

tological domains, a mixture of "natives" and "migrants." Defoe's
Robinson Crusoe and Friday coexist with Coetzee's Susan, Bronte's
Bertha (alias Antoinette) with Rhys's Christophine. By the rules of
the rewrite, nothing can prevent Emma Bovary from taking Alda
Karamazov as her lover. 36 Consequently, the rewrites' fictional worlds
seem to be impossible.
Indeed, in Ep.3.3 we observed a postmodernist rewrite constructing an impossible world. But the impossibility of the world of Foe's
last part does not mean that the fictional worlds of all rewrites are impossible. There is nothing impossible, neither physically nor logically,
about the fictional worlds of The New Sufferings of Young W. or The
Wide Sargasso Sea. The impossibility of the fictional world of a
rewrite is judged by the same criterion that applies to all fictional
worlds: only those are impossible that contain or imply contradictory
states of affairs.
But how is it possible that the violation of the principle of compossibility does not create impossible worlds? The answer to this
question has been given already by Genette and Margolin. Genette,
who does not work with the concepts of possible-worlds semantics,
emphasizes at the conclusion of his major sweep through "hypertextuality": "Every object can be transformed, every method imitated;
there is no art that, by nature, escapes these two modes ofderivation
which, in literature, define hypertextuality'' (1982, 435). Faust or Electra transported into a modern drama create no contradiction; effecting a "diegetic transposition," the modern author can freely modify
these ancient fictional persons to adapt them to their new milieu
(1982, 343, 344). Margolin (1996), who is a possible-worlds theorist,
has recourse to the counterpart relation and thus sees no problem
with the alleged violation of compossibility. He investigates in detail
what are the "relevant dimensions of similarity'' between the original
individual and his or her counterpart, that is, what essential properties they share.37
In the prologue (Pr.2.1) I have argued that the essentialist conception of counterparthood is too restrictive and pleaded for a radically
nonessentialist conception of transworld identity. The semantics of
224

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
the postmodernist rewrite confirms this postulate. Just as there is a
fictional Napoleon who lost the actual Napoleon's essential property
of dying at Santa Helena, so there is a fictional Robinson Cruso(e)
who died on his return to England. Just as the actual Napoleon can
be transformed into an unlimited number of fictional Napoleons,
some of them differing essentially from the actual-world prototype,
so can the fictional Edward Rochester appear in an unlimited number of alternate incarnations, some of them essentially different from
the protagonist of Jane Eyre. The only distinction, though semantically highly significant, is that the transworld identity lineage of
Napoleon originates in the actual world, whereas that of Rochester
originates in the fictional world created by Charlotte Bronte. 38
McHale considers Carlos Fuentes's novel Terra Nostra one of the
pioneering works of postmodernism, because it constructs a scandalous, carnivalesque "transhistorical party ... where characters apparently from disparate historical eras are brought together at the
same time and place" (1987, 17). If in fictional writings historical persona can be transported away from the time and space of their actual
existence, why should the same right be denied to fictional individuals? A postmodernist rewrite is an assertion of the fiction maker's entitlement to draw on the rich pool of popular and less popular fictional persons and create counterparts who differ substantially from
the "originals" and become members of completely new constellations. By its very nature, the rewrite hinges on the presence of counterparts; but it agential constellation need not be extensionally identical to that of the protoworld. Some persons can be deleted, such as
Jane in Rhys's novel, others can be added, such as Susan in Coetzee's
narrative. Coetzee's Cruso and Friday find themselves in the company of Susan, whom they could not encounter in Defoe's world.
Since the fictional world of Foe is not identical with the fictional
world of Robinson Crusoe but is its sovereign alternate, no violation of
the principle of compossibility is at hand.
The nonessentialist semantics of transworld identity relies on one
constant: the proper name as a rigid designator (Pr.2.1). The individuals keep their proper names when moving through different possi225

HETEROCOSMICA

ble worlds, so that we recognize them, even if their essential properties change in the moves. Yet, as we have observed, postmodernist
rewrites do not always obey the semantics of rigid designation. We
are not much bothered by the minor difference between "Crusoe"
and "Cruso," and we know why "Antoinette" is equivalent to
"Bertha." But how can we claim that a fictional person of the name
Wiebeau is a counterpart of the person called Werther, that Antoinette's nameless husband is a counterpart of Rochester?
The allowances that the postmodernist rewrites take with proper
names can be accommodated by adjusting the strategy of transworld
identification. We start by aligning the protowork and its presumed
rewrite on the basis of some strong textural and structural evidencethe title, the quotations, the intertextual allusions, the similarity of
the fictional worlds structure, the homology of agential constellations, the parallelism of the story lines, the like setting. Only when
we have strong enough evidence for the rewrite hypothesis will we
draw the transworld identity lines. Some of these lines will link individuals with different names. Such lines indicate that the rewrite appropriates one aspect of the semantics of the proper name that possible-worlds semantics has noticed, although only in passing: the
transposition of an individual from one world to another might be
accompanied by his or her rebaptizing: the counterpart acquires an
alias.3 9 The semantics of the alias does not invalidate but rather supplements the semantics of rigid designation. Aliases are variants of
one and the same rigid designator in different possible worlds, as long
as we can keep track of the consecutive baptisms (Pr.2.1). 40
In outsmarting the norm of compossibility, postmodernist literature has substantially expanded our fictional universe. Adhering to a
radically nonessentialist poetics of personal identity, it reincarnated
historical and canonical fictional persons in shockingly alternative
guises, lives, and constellations. But the current boom in transworld
travel and transhistorical parties has made it as easy for a writer to
move a fictional person from one world to another as it is for a child
to move a Lego piece from one tower to another. The game is no
longer exciting, and it is time to invent a new one.

226

I

Notes

Prologue: From Nonexistent Entities to Fictional Worlds
1. With a few exceptions, philosophers have not recognized that fiction making is a major cultural and aesthetic activity; they support their
theses with contrived examples or specimens from trivial literature (primarily the detective story and science fiction).To believe that the difference between artificial exempla and literature is only in "embellishments," as, for instance, Plantinga claims (1974, 160), shows an archaic
attitude toward poetic art. Among the philosophers, Walton should be
singled out for praise, because he not only recognizes works of fiction as
"cultural objects" but also draws the necessary epistemological conclusion: an "integrated theory'' of fictionality is desired "in which both aesthetic and metaphysical matters are treated in a unified fashion" (1990,
6). Unfortunately, his own theory (see Pr. 1.5) does not do justice to "cultural objects."
2. It is well known that Russell reversed the position of his juvenilia
and formulated his rigid semantics of nonexistent entities in a critique of
Meinong's views (n. 40).
3. For a criticism of the concept of empty terms, see Dambska [1948]
1979). The undifferentiated mass of nonexistents reappears in Chastain's
enumeration: "Failure of reference" occurs in all "singular terms which
name nothing, maps with imaginary rivers and mountain ranges, paintings of fictitious scenes, hallucinations, dreams, and so on'' (1975, 196).
4. What is a failure from the viewpoint of literary semantics is a triumph oflogical consistency. "A nonexistent golden mountain ... neither
has the property of being golden nor has the property of being not
golden'' (Grossman 1983, 410). According to Crittenden, Russell's view of
fictional terms would force us to accept the Odyssey as "a historical account" that makes false claims about history (about the existence of cyclops, for instance) (1991, 25).

227

Notes to Pages 4-5
5. Frege's semantics is sometimes interpreted as requiring a threevalue logic: true, false, and gap (see Herzberer 1980). In fact, Frege was
unequivocal about the matter: "By the truth-value of a sentence I understand the circumstance that it is true or false. There are no further
truth-values" ([1892] 1969, 46; 62). Fregean logic of fiction is a logic of
truth-value gaps, as conceived by van Fraassen (1966; see also Haack
1974, 47, 55-56; Pelc 1977, 245).
6. Frege anticipated twentieth-century functional linguistics, which
claims that polyfunctionality is a basic and necessary property of naturallanguage communication (see Holenstein 1981; Dolezel 1990, 149-rn
1996). However, many philosophers oflanguage have been unwilling to
acknowledge that under different functional conditions language, or,
more precisely, language use is governed by different logico-semantic
principles. Evans, for example, characterized Frege's exemption of fictional language from the truth-conditions of ordinary language as
"barely intelligible" (1982, 23). Evans failed to mention that the exemption from truth-valuation has a venerable history in philosophy. Already
Aristotle had removed prayers and invocations from the authority of
logic and relegated these speech acts to the domain of rhetoric (De interpretatione 17a). The most forceful post-Frege argument in favor of valuating certain types of statements as neither true nor false is Austin's
(1970, 99).
7. There is no historical link between Frege's and Saussure's semantics, and their logical connection has been noticed only recently by
Ducrot and Todorov (see STII, n.4).
8. Riffaterre explains self-referentiality of poetic language in contrast
to ordinary-language semantics. In ordinary language, reference proceeds
along the "vertical" axis linking signifier, signified, and referent; in poetic
language "the axis of signification is horizontal. The referential function
in poetry is carried out from signifier to signifier" (1983, 35-36).This explanation reveals that the idea of self-referentiality rests on a terminological confusion. In the first occurrence (the "vertical" axis) the term applies to an extralingual relationship-from the sign to the world; in the
second (the "horizontal" axis) it designates a relationship between sign
and sign, which is intralingual. A similar argument against the concept
of self-reference has been put forth by Kerbrat-Orecchioni: "The referent disappears only when sense disappears; conversely, the emergence of
a sense requires a correlative representation of a referent" (1982, 31). Kerbrat-Orecchioni's critique of Saussurean self-referentiality stems from the

228

Notes to Pages 5-9
same doubt as Evans' questioning of Frege's pure-sense language: how
can language be meaningful without any connection to the world?
9. A theory of fictionality was already lacking in the "classical" version of Saussure-inspired poetics, in the Prague school (see Dolezel 1990,
164-67). The Prague school scholars did not proclaim poetic language
self-referential but left the concept of poetic reference underdeveloped.
Mukafovsky spoke vaguely about "universal" and "particular" reference
ofliterary texts (1948, 1:35-36). Jakobson claims that "introversive semiosis" (message signifying itself), which dominates music, glossolalic poetry, and nonrepresentational visual arts, also plays a "cardinal role" in
representational art and poetry; nevertheless he recognizes that in the latter arts it "coexists and coacts" with "extroversive semiosis" (1971, 705).
Recently, Riffaterre proposed a semantics of fictionality within the doctrine of self-referentiality. "Freeing fiction from the shackles of reference," he bases fictional truth on text grammar: "Readers need not be familiar with the reality that the text is about in order to believe it true.
The only reference against which they need to test the narrative's truth is
language. All they have to verify is that the text is derived grammatically"
(1990, 8). Riffaterre's study of the various techniques of fictional text derivation is a model of narrative poetics, but his identifying of truth-valuation with grammaticality is theoretically counterproductive.
IO. Throughout this book, particular is used in Strawson's sense: it is
an entity that can be identified by "individuating facts" or "logically individuating descriptions," facts or descriptions that are true of one and
only one entity. The basic individuating fact of material bodies is their
spatiotemporal location (1959, 9-30; see also 1992, 54-58). Universal is
the opposite ofparticular.
u. While Auerbach used actual universals as semantic interpretants,
Watt takes them as historical determinants of fictional particulars.
Mimesis becomes the explanandum of the genesis of fictional entities.
There is, however, no epistemological difference between the semantic
and the historical praxis of mimesis: Watt's mimetic history is a projection of mimetic interpretation onto the time axis.
12. A more charitable evaluation could see pseudomimesis as an unintended subversion of the mimetic doctrine: if fictional realms are presumed to exist, wherever or however, then the one-world frame is seriously put into question.
13. Russell's contribution to this law was stated in Pr.I.I; the inclusion
of Leibniz will be understood after reading Pr.2.1.

229

Notes to Pages ro-r3
14. Martfnez-Bonati expressed this belief when he emphasized that
"the fundamental compass of narrative" is "a world of individuals." "Cervante'sDon Quijote is not basically a type or symbol, but an individual"
(1981, 24). In philosophical literature, the same conviction is expressed by
Parsons: "The characters of fiction ... are always understood as concrete"
(1982, 318).
15. Woods is aware of this restriction of formal theories when he

points out that "fictional discourse lays strong claims upon a non-negligible semantic status; and the appropriate theories, I should think,
would need to articulate the appropriate doctrines of reference, inference
and truth" (1982, 553). Wirrer (1982) connects the "fiction operator"
(contrasted with the "fact operator") with the "fiction convention," thus
suggesting a link between the formal and the pragmatic theories of fictionality.
16. The pragmatics of pretense needs a semantics of fictional entities,
or, as Lycan puts it, it "still must distinguish between fictional truth and
fictional falsity" (1994, 67), so it borrows the most primitive version of
the mimetic doctrine. Fictional persons are "people," fictional settings
actual places: "Miss Murdoch ... tells us a story; in order to do that, she
pretends to make a series of assertions about people in Dublin in r9r6"
(emphasis added). Conan Doyle "blundered" when he made Sherlock
Holmes and Watson go from Baker Street to Paddington Station by a
route that is "geographically impossible" (Searle 1979, 70). In such a perspective, the fictionalist's statements about fictional entities are either
pretended true assertions or blunders.
17. For a meticulous philosophical critique of the various versions of
"pretended reference," see Crittenden 1991, 45-52.
18. Anna Wierzbicka takes a similar position in the broader area of
human communication. Pragmatics is approached "as a part, or an aspect, of semantics"; "but this does not mean that anything that has ever
been called 'pragmatics' could, or should, be swallowed by semantics"
(1991, 5, 19).
19. "A possible world," Kuhn explains, "is often spoken of as a way

our world might have been .... Thus, in our world the earth has only a
single natural satellite (the moon), but there are other possible worlds, almost the same as ours, except that the earth has two or more satellites or
has none at all. ... There are also possible worlds less like ours: some in
which there is no earth, others in which there are no planets, and still
others in which not even the laws of nature are the same" (1989, 13). Ac-

230

Notes to Pages r3-r5
cording to Kirkham, "a possible world is a hypothetical entity postulated
as an aid to talking about and studying the various ways the universe
might have been different.... A possible world is a complete universe
that differs in some way or another (or in more than one way) from the
actual universe" (1992, 11).
20. Chisholm considers the term actual ambiguous and proposes instead "the world that obtains" or "the prevailing world" (1981, 129); this
might be a useful terminological suggestion, but it only confirms the
need for assigning to one possible world exclusive ontological status.
21. In cognitive activities possible worlds are means for grasping actuality. "We explore the plurality ofpossibilia to find out a suitable model
for realia" (Eco 19886, 57).
22. Adams, calling possible worlds "completely determinate," formulates th~ criterion of this property: "(1) For every possible world, w, and
every pair of contradictory propositions, one member of the pair is true
in w and the other member is false in w. (2) Each possible world, if temporally ordered at all, is a complete world history and not a momentary
stage of one. The actual world, therefore, includes what has actually existed or happened and what will actually exist or happen, as well as what
now exists or happens" (1979, 191; see also Bradley and Swartz 1979, 4-5;
Rescher and Brandom 1980, 2).
23. Kripke's inconspicuous note is very important in assuring us that
the concept of miniworld is logically compatible with the concept of infinite possible world: "If we restrict the worlds to a narrower class of
miniworlds, essentially all the issues regarding say, rigid designation, remain the same. So do the questions of modal semantics" (1980, 19 n. 18).
24. This idea was central to the first, eighteenth-century version of
possible-worlds poetics inspired by Leibniz and Wolff and developed by
J. J. Bodmer, J. J. Breitinger, and A. G. Baumgarten (see Dolezel 1990,
33-52). Leibnizian poetics was forgotten, and the term world was used
merely as faron de parler in such phrases as "the world of Crime and Punishment," "the Shakespearean world," "the world/universe of science fiction," etc. Penetrating observations about fictional worlds of novels, prefiguring tenets of possible-worlds semantics, were made by Dorothy Van
Ghent (1953). Alexander Zholkovsky works with the concept of an author's "poetic world" (1984, 63-82, 195-214), as does McCormick (1988,
256). The title of this book adopts a term used by Baumgarten (albeit in
a narrower sense) and thus indicates the link of contemporary possibleworlds semantics of fictionality to the eighteenth-century episode.

231

Notes to Pages I6-I7

25. Ruth Ronen, while emphasizing the "affinity between possible
worlds and fictional worlds," expresses a similar caveat (1990, 288, 295;
1994, 5-9). Some possible-worlds philosophers, obviously fearing logical
difficulties, retreat into the one-world model frame when theorizing
about fiction. Thus Plantinga's daring ontology and semantics is coupled
with the most timid, Russellian conception of fictionality: "Stories are
about nothing at all and the names they contain denote neither actual
nor possible objects" (1974, 163). Woltersdorff succumbs to universalist
mimesis and deletes fictional particulars: "Essentially what I have done is
elaborate Aristotle's suggestion that characters are types-not persons of
a certain type but person-types. The character Hamlet is not a non-existent particular, but a type" (1989, 248).
26. Leibniz posited a sharp distinction between the actual world and
the realm of fiction: "It cannot be denied that many stories, especially
those we call novels, may be regarded as possible, even if they do not actually take place in this particular sequence of the universe which God
has chosen-unless someone imagines that there are certain poetic regions in the infinite extent of space and time where we might see wandering over the earth King Arthur of Great Britain, Amadis of Gaul, and
the fabulous Dietrich von Bern invented by the Germans" ([1679] 1857,
179; Loemker 1969, 263). "Whether Astree is possible in an absolute sense
is a question to which I answer 'Yes,' because it does not imply any contradiction. Yet in order for this novel to exist in fact, it would be necessary for the rest of the universe also to be entirely different from what it
is" ([1714] 1887, 572; Loemker 1969, 661). It is statements like these that
justify my including Leibniz's name in the designation of the "law" that
postulates ontological homogeneity of the actual world (Pr. 1.4).
27. A curious case is highly instructive. lssacharoff (1987, 86-87)
points out that von Gerlach, a fictional person of Jean Paul Sartre's play
The Condemned ofAltona, by coincidence bears the name of an actual
person. Sartre was so embarrassed when he discovered the "mistake" that
he apologized in the prefatory note to his play to "one of the bravest and
best-known opponents of National Socialism." But, strictly speaking,
Sartre had nothing to apologize for: the coincidence does not make
Sartre's von Gerlach actual, it only brings about a rare semantic phenomenon-post-Jestum transworld identity. Kripke, who is not aware of
the von Gerlach case, comments on a similar but construed example:
"The mere discovery that there was indeed a detective with exploits like
those of Sherlock Holmes would not show that Conan Doyle was writ232

Notes to Pages I7-I8

ing about this man; it is theoretically possible, though in practice fantastically unlikely, that Doyle was writing pure fiction with only a coincidental resemblance to the actual man'' (1980, 157).
28. In the end, Lewis disarms all those who might classify him as essentialist with a charming innocence: "The essences of things are settled
only to the extent that the counterpart relation is, and the counterpart
relation is not very settled at all" (1983, 42). I feel, therefore, comfortable
using the convenient term counterpart in a radically nonessentialist semantics of fictionality.
29. With respect to fictional counterparts of actual places, the principle of verisimilitude has been rejected by Ronen: "a) it is impossible to
demarcate essential properties of Paris which do (or should) recur in each
of its literary constructions; b) diverse descriptive sets can be attributed
to the same name in different fictional worlds and therefore descriptions
that replace a name in one particular fictional world cannot be transferred or applied to other possible worlds" (1988, 503). Discussing the opposition of biography and fiction, Cohn emphasizes "the biographer's
constraint and the novelist's freedom" (1989, 6).
30. Pavel states that "within fiction names work like usual proper
names, that is as rigid designators attached to individuated objects, independent of the objects' properties" (1986, 37). It is, however, questionable to extend the concept of rigid designation to the so-called natural
kinds and other, unspecified types of common names. If one claims that
"virtually every term in the common language is rigid" (Schwartz 1977a,
39 n. 23), then the whole point of rigid designation is lost.
31. In the dramatic text of his above-mentioned tragicomedy,
Napoleon in New Orleans, Kaiser meticulously manipulates the use of the
proper name and alias. When the actor named Youyou assumes the personality of the emperor in the colossal fraud concocted by his friend, he
is renamed Youyou-Napoleon. But when the gang confesses to the fraud,
he is returned to the name Youyou.
32. Of the theoretical difficulties, let me mention just one: the
"mixed-bag" conception requires two different semantics for the fictional
text, one for sentences about Pierre Bezuchov, another for sentences
about Napoleon. In reading fictional texts we are expected to be switching constantly from one mode of interpretation to another (Pollard 1973,
61; Pelc 1977, 266). Long before possible-worlds semantics of fictionality,
the ontological homogeneity of fictional entities was recognized by Margaret Macdonald: ''A storyteller is not making informative assertions

233

Notes to Pages I8-20
about real persons, places and incidents even when these are mentioned
in fictional sentences. But rather ... these also function like purely fictional elements, with which they are always mingled in a story" (1954,
181).
33. It has been noted that the same principle is valid from the viewpoint of the reader: "For the reader it is not easier to create and believe
in the well-documented world of Zola than it is for him to imagine hobbits or elves; the imaginative leap into the novel's world of time and
space must be made in both cases" (Hutcheon 1980, 78). Crittenden,
who does not accept possible-worlds semantics, bases his theory on "one
specific kind of fiction": "novels and stories having to do with normal
human beings in realistic kinds of situation" (1991, 79). His claim that
"realistic fiction is ... philosophically fundamental" has no historical or
theoretical grounds. Crittenden is aware of the existence of "non-realistic fiction" (myth, fairy stories, fantasy, science fiction, modernist fiction), but his severely hamstrung poetics cannot offer any theoretical explanation of their "structure" (1991, 155).
34. Leibniz could not accommodate the notion of transworld identity within his conception of possible worlds. Referring to his famous reflection on possible Adams, Parkinson writes: "Leibniz is saying that we
are not to think of one and the same individual as a member of a number of possible worlds. The complete concept of Adam is tied to one possible world, the possible world of which that concept is a member" (1995,
216.) The principle of compossibility is more profiled in Ep. 4.
35. The necessary link between the laws of the world and the compossibility of its constituents was perceived clearly by Russell: "Without
the need for some general laws, any two possibles would be compossible,
since they cannot contradict one another. Possibles cease to be compossible when there is no general law to which both conform" (1937, 67).
Rescher vacillates. When speaking about possible individuals, he asserts
"an aggregative conception of possible worlds": "Possible worlds just are
certain collections of possible individuals .... Worlds impose no 'emergent' features on their individuals, features which could not in principle
be determined to hold of these individuals considered in separation,
without reference to world environments" (1975, 94). However, when
discussing the "lawfulness" of possible worlds, Rescher reverses his position: "To accept a law is to exclude possibilities-it is to introduce a
characteristic restriction on the sphere of'possible individuals'" (146).
36. According to Eco, "a WJ is accessible to a Wi when the world

234

Notes to Pages 20-24
structure of W'i can generate (through manipulations of the relations between individuals and properties) the world structure of WJ" (1979, 231).
37. Thanks to the stability of these instructions, readers' processings
show substantial agreement, as empirical studies of reading practices discover. With respect to poetry, Fairley arrived at the following conclusion:
"Reading and responding to poems is not entirely an idiosyncratic and
subjective experience.... Substantial agreements may be found regarding matters of structure and meaning" (1979, 349). Similarly, studying
the readers' processing of narratives, Miall found a high degree of conformity, suggesting that "the reading process is directed in systematic and
partly predictable ways by the literary text" (1990, 337).
38. Philosophers of fictionality, unaware of the semiotic mechanisms
of accessibility, encounter serious difficulties when theorizing about the
reception process: either the actual "observer" (reader, spectator) is denied access to fictional worlds (Wolterstorff 1980, m-12) or the implausible assumption is made that he or she is both actual and fictional (Walton 1978/79, 21-22).
39. Crittenden saves face when analysing critically "pan-fictionalism," the claim "that anything whatever is fictional" (1991, 163). Suddenly, he accepts the concept of fictional world and sets it apart from the
real world: "A fictional world is an entire set of characters, events, and
background circumstances all bound together into a unity, and it is from
this entire totality that the mature reader is conceptually removed" (1991,
171). So, in the end, we cannot make a telephone call to Watson, and,
alas, neither can we ask Holmes to hunt down our criminals.
40. Quite a few contemporary theorists of fiction (Chisholm 1972;
Parsons 1980; Kany6 1980; Merrell 1983, 93-97; Pavel 1986, 27-31;
McCormick 1990, 252-73; Pozuelo Yvancos 1993, 134-35; Lycan 1994,
4-19; for some reservations see Woods 1978a) have been attracted to
Alexis Meinong's ontology (first proposed in 1904), resuscitating it after
Russell's onslaught (Meinong [1904] 1960). Meinong's ontology, which
accepts entities "without restriction to the special case of existence" and
"tries to encompass also everything that is not real" (Meinong [1923]
1974, 224, 225), seems to be compatible with a theory that grants the status of existence to fictional semiotic objects.
4r. The opposition between world imaging (representation) and
world constructing is obliterated in radical constructivism, which claims
that all texts are world constructing and all worlds dependent on textual
activity (see Goodman 1978; Schmidt 1984). According to Goodman,

235

Notes to Pages 24-27
"We can have words without a world but no world without words or
other symbols" (1978, 6). Goodman gives no directions as to where
"words without a world" could be found. For a criticism of the "semiotic
idealism," see Savan 1983 and Freundlieb 1988. The opposition between
I-texts and C-texts is also annulled in mimetic semantics, which, as we
have seen (Pr. 1.3), makes fictional texts represent the actual world. Not
surprisingly, mimesis serves well as a face-saving device for the radical
constructivist: "Fiction, then, whether written or painted or acted, applies truly neither to nothing nor to diaphanous possible worlds, but, albeit metaphorically, to actual worlds .... Fiction operates in the actual
worlds in much the same way as nonfiction" (Goodman 1978, rn4).
Rorty, who has no sympathy for "the relationship which hooks mental
representations to reality," nevertheless cleverly recognizes the need to
preserve some realists, so that the philosophical game can continue: "The
ironic attitude towards 'truth' which 'modernism' exhibits would be impossible without a lively philosophical tradition which keeps the picture
of mind or language alive. Without the foredoomed struggle of philosophers to invent a form of representation which will constrain us to truth
while leaving us free to err, to find pictures where there are only games,
there would be nothing to be ironic about. In a culture lacking the contrast between science and poetry, there would be no poetry about poetry,
no writing which was a glorification of writing itself" (1982, 136).
42. This may be right de facto, but it is not true de jure. Prominent
narratologists, especially Roland Barthes and A. J. Greimas, have explicitly claimed that all recits, fictional or nonfictional, fall into the domain
of narratology.
43. Text-inherent commentaries have to be clearly distinguished
from the actual readers' evaluations of the story, its acting characters, etc.
The latter will be influenced by the former, but, in principle, the readers,
having at their disposal the total information carried by the fictional text,
are able to form their own opinions.
44. Mieke Bal is right that the prefix meta, so popular in French narratology, should be reserved "for a more appropriate use" (as in metalanguage and metatheory, I suppose); but I do not find attractive her suggestion to replace it with hypo (1972, 35).
45. Reflecting on the above-quoted opening sentence of Anna Karenina, Searle noticed the special status of I-digressions within his "pragmatics of pretence": "That, I take it, is not a fictional but a serious utter-

Notes to Pages 27-38
ance. It is a genuine assertion. It is part of the novel but not part of the
fictional story'' (1979, 74).
46. To distinguish the sentences of the fictional text from paraphrase
statements, Pavel designated the latter as ersatz-sentences (1975/76).
Woods dramatized the truth-conditions of ersatz-sentences by calling
them "bet-sensitive": one would win a bet on "Sherlock Holmes lived on
Baker Street" but lose a bet on "Sherlock Holmes lived on Berczy Street"
(1974, 13-14; for a similar argument, see Plantinga 1974, 162; Searle 1979,
72; Chateaux 1976; Purtill 1978; Woods 19786). The general import of
the truth-conditions of paraphrase for a theory of literary interpretation
is pointed out in Dolezel 1985. Crittenden supports the truth-valuation
of paraphrase sentences by an argument that is especially relevant in the
context of contemporary literary theory: "The contents of a story-its
fictional world-have an independent status that can be learned by anyone who reads it. These contents are objective and independent of individual belief in this way: whether a certain character is in a story or
whether a given state of affairs holds there are not matters of arbitrary
belief; rather, these depend on what the sentences setting out the story
say" (1991, 93).

l· One-Person· Worlds
1. Narratology has paid no attention to this structure. Norman Friedman, who is aware of the existence of one-person stories, treats them as
exceptional cases, suitable for poetry rather than narrative (1975, 172-73).
In contrast, psychology and psychoanalysis find the world of "solitude"
fascinating (see Storr 1988).
2. According to Novak, three possible outcomes of the experiment
were considered in Defoe's time: "Some writers believed that the isolated
natural man might, through the use of his reason, achieve the same
moral and intellectual condition as the human being raised in society.
Others ... suggested that he would be savage and brutal but have greater
freedom and happiness and fewer vices than civilized man. The majority
of writers, however, argued that man was a social animal, that the bestial
life of the solitary savage was insecure, and that far from being happy, the
isolated natural man lived in constant fear of death" (1963, 23).
3. The fact that Defoe achieved a radical change in Crusoe's condition by a minimal sign has been praised as manifestation of his "perfect

237

Notes to Pages 38-42
art" (Tillyard 1969, 68-69; see also Blewett 1979, 39; Rogers 1979,
n3-16).
4. Crusoe's "clear-eyed co-operation with circumstances" has been
pointed out by Richetti (1975, 39). Richetti has also recognized the contrast between the conduct of cultural heroes and Crusoe's mode of acting
but claims that "a strong temptation'' toward the heroic mode is observable in Defoe's narrative (1975, 53).
5. He sees "no Prospect of Life" and therefore proposes to himself to
"consider the next Day what Death [he] should dye" (47). The next day,
however, this intention is forgotten.
6. It has been observed in critical literature that Defoe's narrative is
not free of contradictions and inconsistencies; they are especially apparent when it comes to Crusoe's stock. We are told, for example, that he
came ashore with nothing "but a Knife, a Tobacco-pipe, and a little Tobacco in a Box" (47). This does not prevent Defoe from constructing an
episode about Crusoe's lack of a pipe and his joy when he was able to
make one (144). (For a theoretical assessment of authorial contradictions,
see VI.2.)
7. My analysis incorporates divinity into the novel's fictional world
and thus rejects the suggestion that it is a mere "rhetorical device, convenient for the presentation of change and for tying up of narratives"
(Bell 1985, 94). On the other hand, it is an exaggeration to call Crusoe's
history "a conversion story, like that of Augustine or Baxter." As the critic
himself had to acknowledge, Crusoe is not a true convert, because he
sheds his Christianity "as soon as [he] gets back to Europe" (Benjamin
1969, 35-36). Watt's opinion, that "each of his [Crusoe's] actions is followed by a passage of reflection in which Crusoe ponders over the problem of how it reveals the intentions of the divine providence" (1963, 79),
is a sweeping generalization based on rather meager evidence. The two
examples that Watt submits (Crusoe's illness and the sprouting of the
randomly spilled corn) are not actions but nature events. Moreover, Watt
overlooks the fact that Crusoe corrected his original interpretation of the
corn incident when he discovered its true cause.
8. To avoid any misunderstanding, let me state that there is no necessary connection between the one-person world and the first-person
narrative mode. Crusoe's Ich-form both precedes and continues beyond
the island episode. The two other instances of the one-person world presented in this chapter are not /ch-form narratives.
9. A remarkable distinction is worth noting. While the rationalistic

238

Notes to Pages 42-45
philosophy of human striving is constructed in the apersonal, gnomic I
digressions, religious quietism is expressed by the subjective first-person
narrative: "I look'd now upon the World as a Thing remote, which I had
nothing to do with, no Expectation from, and indeed no Desires about:
In a Word, I had nothing indeed to do with it, nor was ever like to have"
(128). The difference could indicate that rejection of the world is the fictional person's transient opinion at a moment of resignation, whereas rationalistic philosophy is the actual author's firm belie£
IO. Picking up on a remark by Hemingway, some critics consider
"Big Two-Hearted River" an episode of the "Nick Adams cycle," narrating Nick's return from the war (Baker 1969, 156; Flora 1982, 147). For
Philip Young the short story also becomes meaningful only when set in
a coherent narrative of the cycle; otherwise, "a story about a man fishing"
is felt by many readers to be "quite pointless." Yet Young is unspecific as
to the place of"BigTwo-Hearted River" in the life story of Nick Adams;
he sees it as "a picture of a sick man, and of a man who is in escape from
whatever it is that made him sick. ... The blows which he has sufferedphysical, psychical, moral, spiritual and emotional-have damaged him"
(1966, 47). There does not seem to be much about Nick that is sick. The
"damage" to his personality structure is done by the severe restrictions
reigning in the fictional world of this short story.
11. Nick is a typical modern consumer: "he liked to open cans," and
he thinks that the canned apricots "were better than fresh apricots" (217).
Surprisingly, an American critic claims that "Nick is quite adept at providing tasty food on this journey" (Flora 1989, 53).
12. In the one-person world, there is almost no opportunity to create
dramatism by verbal acting. Nick's is restricted to brief intransitive
speech acts, typical of soliloquy (apostrophe, self-address, exclamation).
13. It has been claimed that the duels of human agents with animals,
typical of Hemingway's fictional world, are basically "sports events"
rather than "existential confrontations between man and nature" (Nicolaisen 1979, 36). But even if we accept Nick's duel with the big trout as a
sports event, we cannot overlook the existential dimension of the confrontation between animal and man in The Old Man and the Sea.
14. Overzealous interpreters have suggested that Nick's expert routines are "a ritualization of conventional activity" that help him "recover
psychic balance" (Defalco 1963, 145; see also Wells 1969, 132; McLain
1974, 160; Flora 1989, 52). My analysis of the semantic structure ofNick's
acting reveals rather the mental poverty of pure expertness.

239

Notes to Pages 4r53
15. The landscape becomes a "motion picture" when Nick walks and
the temporal dimension is drawn into the construction: "For some time
as he walked Nick had been in sight of one of the big islands of pine
standing out above the rolling high ground he was crossing. He dipped
down and then as he came slowly up to the crest of the ridge he turned
and made toward the pine trees" (212-13). Referring to landscapes of this
kind, Nicolaisen claimed that "it is only the feet which seem to establish
a direct contact with the exterior world; otherwise nature is prominently
empty and deprived of the life that usually affects man's senses" (1979,
19). My analysis flatly contradicts this claim.
16. It is symptomatic that the only thing Nick does "meditatively'' is
"sucking the apricots down'' (217).
17. Unlike Crusoe and Nick, Des Esseintes "is ultimately dependent
on the world 'outside,' both for its material resources, and also for the
content of his aesthetic projects (art, literature, jewels, perfumes all come
from the outside)" (Lloyd 1990, 91).
18. The progress of Des Esseintes's disease forces him to expand his
physical activities; thus, for example, "he went so far as to leave the house
and go for strolls in the country'' (187; 94).
19. The standard occidental hierarchy of senses is enunciated by Strawson: "Traditionally, five senses are recognized as distinguishable modes of
perception of public objects. Of these, taste and smell are strikingly more
trivial than the others ... It does not seem that to suppose our experience
free of gustatory or olfactory elements would, by itself, be to invite a significant conceptual revolution" (1959, 64). The fin-de-siecle "revolution''
of the "lower" senses is a challenge to the occidental hierarchy.
20. The ideological character of Des Esseintes's aesthetics renders his
practical reasoning tautological: the choice of an alternative is predetermined by its ideological weight. Such is the case of the color selection for
his rooms (which we have already mentioned): "There could be no
doubt whatever as to Des Esseintes's choice" (98; 30).
21. During the "London trip" interlude, Des Esseintes's imagination
reproduces images of Dickens' fictional characters (248; 138). The visit to
Des Esseintes's fictional world of persons from other fictional worlds is
rare in Huysmans's novel but highly interesting for fictional semantics
(Ep.4).
22. The significance of Des Esseintes's hallucinations was not lost on
the critics. Court-Perez notes that "Des Esseintes no longer controls his
dreaming, he becomes an object of what invades him" [ne dirige plus son

240

Notes to Pages 53-56
reve, il devient l'objet de ce qui l'envahit] (1987, 91-92); Lloyd perceives
the reversal of the outside/inside opposition: "The outside irrupts from
within as a virulent, destructive force which the hero cannot resist"
(1990, 92).
23. This assumption has also been confirmed with regard to the evaluations of the painter Gustave Moreau (Brunner and Coninck 1929,
75-108; Issacharoff 1970, 58-59; Maingon 1977, 48-49, 108). A detailed

assessment of the relationship between Des Esseintes's essay on Latin literature and its historical sources can be found in Fumaroli 1977, 407-18,
and Ceard 1985. According to Court-Perez (1987, 61-62), Gourmont
asked Huysmans to write a preface to the first edition of Le Latin Mystique; in subsequent editions, this preface was not reprinted.

fl· Action and Motivation
r. The two core parts of the traditional model of narrative structure
are enhanced by secondary constituents, particularly spatial setting and
temporal organization.
2. In 1963, von Wright still writes: "The concept of a human act has,
as such, been relatively little discussed in philosophic literature" (19636,
35). The focus on action theory is a symptom of a more general turn in
analytic philosophy-a radical expansion of its scope: "In order to gain
the clarity, rigor, and precision that analytic philosophers have valued so
highly, they have imposed severe limitations on what is and is not the
proper business of philosophy and philosophic analysis .... The dialectic of analytic philosophy itself has brought us to a renewed sense of the
complexity and variety of philosophic issues that need to be confronted.
Concerning the concept of action, we are becoming aware of how inadequate our grasp is of the complexity of this concept and its interrelationships with other concepts. But even more important, we are becoming aware of questions that must be raised which analytic philosophers
have scarcely begun to ask" (Bernstein 1971, 302). In some European
writings an empirically oriented action theory is called "praxeology'' (see
Daval 1981).
3. Von Wright's proposal relates the logic of action to classical formal
logic through the logic of change: "We could say that formal logic, as we
know it today, is essentially the logic of a static world.... Acts, however,
are essentially connected with changes .... A necessary requirement of a
Logic of Action is therefore a Logic of Change" (19636, vii). Brennen241

Notes to Pages 56-57
stuhl, who criticized von Wright on some points, accepted his conception of "event": "a change of state of the person or of its environment"
(1975, 192).
4. "One event is an alternative to another for an agent just in case he
can bring about each but not both'' (Zimmerman 1984, 190).
5. The basic bodily movements often show individual or cultural
"symptoms"; they are performed with characteristic "body techniques"
(see Mauss 1979, 97-123). These symptoms play a major role in the design of some fictional agents.
6. This model of acting is a theoretical background for interpreting
metaphors, category shifts, and so on (a ball kicking a person, a ball becoming an acting person). Other seemingly problematic cases are not
anomalies of the action structure but distortions in the action description (texture). Thus, the description "The ball broke the window" is "ellipsis of event-causality'': even though the person is not explicitly expressed, the sentence presupposes that the breakage was "caused" by an
agent (Davidson 1980, 54; VII.2 above).
7. Mele, arguing against the obsessive need of some philosophers to
"individuate" actions, finds it more profitable to accept that "there may
be a 'larger' action having 'smaller' actions among its parts" (1992, 5).
8. To be precise, the role of mental factors in acting has been recognized since antiquity, especially in Aristotle's philosophy of action (see
Charles 1984; Donagan 1987, 41). Within narratology, Bremond pointed
out their theoretical significance, linking acting to three kinds of binary
mental "mobiles": hedonic (desire/aversion), pragmatic (favorable calculus/unfavorable calculus) and ethical (awareness of obligation/awareness
of interdiction) (1973, 156, 18r88). Brand (who offers a useful survey of
contemporary action theory), emphasizes that the introduction (or reintroduction) of mental factors into the concept of acting does not require
a full-fledged philosophy of the mind: "By and large, action theory can
proceed without resolving the outstanding issues about the nature of the
mental" (1984, 45). Certainly, we are not forced int0 Cartesian dualism
when we postulate a connection between the mental and the physical.
Both cognitive psychologists (Flanagan 1984, 243) and philosophers
(Shaffer 1968, 52-57; Danto 1979, rn) integrate mental and physical concepts into a monistic ontology. Strawson, explaining his conception of
person as a fusion· of physical and mental states and events (1959, 89,
rn1-3), states: "When we say such things as 'I closed my eyes and (I)
thought of you' or 'When I sit in that chair, I feel deliciously relaxed,' we

Notes to Pages 5r59
do not, I suggest, for a moment suppose that we are switching the reference of'I' between its first occurrence in the sentence and its second. We
are ordinarily content to operate with a concept of ourselves and other
people as beings who are both corporeal and conscious; and it is to such beings that we ordinarily employ the personal pronoun to refer" (1980, 269;
emphasis added). Searle maintains that we live in "one world which contains mental things in the sense in which it contains liquid things and solid
things" (1983, 271; see also Rapoport 1974, 62; Dennett 1978, 26r85).
9. Since Brentano, intentionality has been thought of as a distinctive
property of mental phenomena. Mental phenomena are intentional in
having objects, "even though the objects which they can be said to have
do not in fact exist" (Chisholm 1957, 169). It is not in my competence to
resolve the tangled issue, but I sympathize with the view that the intention for and in acting is a special case of the mind's intentionality: its object is action, even though the action has not yet been or never will be
materialized. It was Searle who put forth this view: "On my account intending to do something is just one form of Intentionality along with
belief, hope, fear, desire, and lots of others" (1983, 3). For lucid summaries of the various views of intentionality, see Meiland 1970 and
Aquila 1977. Brand succumbs to the ambiguity of ordinary language
when he accepts intentionality as the defining feature of all acting but, at
the same time, uses the term "intentional acting" in the narrow sense of
"planned" action (1984, 37).
IO. Beardsley holds that one cannot do D intentionally "without being aware that one is doing D" (1978, 168). Donagan's example shows
that such a restriction is too severe and would deny the status of acting
not only to routines but also to actions done unconsciously or subconsciously (see II.2).
II. Nature farce is a term encountered in some versions of case grammar (Huddleston 1970). Those semanticians who do not accept N-force
face serious difficulties in interpreting events. Thus Halliday has to consider the dubious term "inanimate actor" (1970, 149). Chafe makes the
absurd claim that sentences of the type "It's raining" or "It's snowing" express an action because they answer the question "What's it doing?"
(1970, rn2). Bartsch and Vennemann, using as example the event-description, "The water pushed the rocks over the cliff," pointed out the
problem: "One would be reluctant to call it [the water] an agent, and it
cannot be an instrument because for something to be an instrument it
must be used by an agent in performing a task" (1972, 29).

2 43

Notes to Pages 60-63
12. Danto uses a striking example to demonstrate the person's inability to control biological events: "Consider the male erection, a bodily
event externally quite like the raising of an arm .... It remains the commonly received view that erection is not an action, and men invariably
are aware that it is not something they do, that it is a response, something that happens to them" (1973, 55). Shaffer points to pathological behavior-"tremors of the hand, twitches and ticks, and the violent movements associated with epileptic seizures"-to support the claim that
"they are things which happen to the person rather than things which
the person actively does" (1968, 79).
13. It was Austin's famous ''A Plea for Excuses" (1970, 175-204) that
introduced the "breakdowns" in acting into contemporary analytic philosophy.
14. This distinction is predicted in Aristotle's differentiation of
"tragic" and "comic" errors (see Else 1957, 189).
15. Cognitive psychology has provided various accounts and classifications of agential mistakes (Rehbein 1977, 230-31; Reason 1979, 6r89;
Rumelhart and Norman 1982; Coval and Campbell 1992, 97, ro3-22).
We should be careful, however, not to interpret as accident such modifications of actions and activities as are due to a shift in intentions. There
is no "deviation of action from intention'' (as Reason claims), if the original intention was changed or abandoned. Accidents occur in the time interval (however minimal) between the intention and its implementation.
16. As Rescher observes, "Fate and fortune-inexorable destiny and
mere chance-have ever been close allies," at least since the Greeks and
the Romans associated the goddesses of Necessity and Fortune. Yet, in
fact, they are opposites, "the one geared to blind and unpredictable
chance, the other to foreordained and inexorabable fate" (1995, 8, 12). An
action-based theory explains this double-faced character of accident, often exploited in fictional narratives (see III.2.3).
17. Speaking generally about events, Danto spells out this condition
with characteristic wit: "What happened to me last night is that I did not
sleep. There are many other things of which it would be true but uncharacteristic to say that they did not happen to me last night, i.e. I did
not pass into Nirvana, I did not give birth to a giraffe, I did not turn into
a pillar of pistachio ice-cream, and so-endlessly-on. But these are
things I am incapable of having happen to me, and so their absences are
not part of my life" (1973, 171).
18. The term motive, encountered in psychology and elsewhere, is

244

Notes to Pages 63-65
used to refer to a particular reason for a particular action: "Motive is
some occurrence that functions as a spring to action" (Melden 1964, 83).
But restricting motivation to particular motives leaves many actions unexplained or incomprehensible. Melden himself gives the example of
Meursault's stated motive for killing the Arab (in Camus's L'Etranger) as
making "no sense" (1964, 83). Ricoeur criticized this narrow view (1977,
40-48, 85-93) but did not seek advice from motivational psychology.
Unlike motive, motivation is systemic both in its own characteristics (motivational systems) and with respect to persons (habitual dispositions).
19. The systems can be briefly presented as follows: (1) The sensory
system stimulates bodily responses that aim at releasing pressure or tension in the organism. (2) The system of curiosity makes the organism react to new stimuli. (3) The affiliative system motivates a person's contact
with others. (4) The aggressive system provokes reactions to frustration
by others. (5) The achievement system stimulates goal-oriented performance. (6) The power system provides a person with the ability to withstand influence by others. (7) The independence system motivates persons to act on their own. Dividing the systems into "asocial" (sensory,
curiosity, achievement) and "social" (affiliative, aggressive, power, independence), Birch and Veroff indicate which of the drives characterize the
person on its own (i.e., can be operative in the one-person world) and
which require societal grouping (the multiperson world) (1966). It has to
be emphasized that human drives, including those that correspond to
animal instincts, are strongly influenced by cultural conditions: "Even
simple homeostatically motivated behaviour may in man become complicated, diversified and modified through interaction with tastes and
habits of eating and food seeking which are to a considerable extent acquired and maintained through social pressures" (Vernon 1969, 39).
20. We generally agree that "biological needs such as hunger 'drive'
us to activities designed to meet that need" (Evans 1989, 86).
21. Although an ideal model of decision making can be formally devised (see Brand 1984, 130), persons are "limited information processors"
(Carroll and Payne 1976a, x) and cannot apprehend all the alternatives
available in a given situation; they arrive at decisions by "bounded rationality'' (Crozier and Friedberg 1980, 175; see also Dawes 1976, 4).
22. The one-person world is a good starting point for analyzing emotionality, because emotion is essentially an intrapersonal experience.
However, the analysis reaches over into the multiperson world where
emotional relationships and collective emotions emerge (IV.2.1).

245

Notes to Pages 6670
23. ''Aggression ... may take many forms, of which anger is only
one. Conversely, anger may be expressed in a great variety of ways, nonagressive as well as aggressive" (Averill 1979, u; see also Rapoport 1974,
no-22). Similarly, in the curiosity drive the emotion of "interest-excitement" was uncovered; it motivates investigative, exploratory, and creative
activity, especially in sciences and arts (Izard 1977, 189-238).
24. De Sousa (1987, n6) distinguishes several kinds of the emotions'
object. We have to protest loudly when he restricts the "target" of emotions to "real objects" only. The object of emotion can be equally real,
fictional, or illusory.
25. Solomon rejects the concept of basic emotions and generally is
rather skeptical about classifying this indeterminate area of mental life.
He nevertheless proposes his own "emotional register," a hodge-podge of
diverse mental and modal categories, including, among others, anger,
duty, faith, friendship, and hope (1976, 282-368).
26. English-writing psychologists rarely use the term passion in its etymological sense, i.e., as designating the passive experiencing of emotions (see Averill 1980, 150-51). In French semiotics, passion refers to the
"deep structure" modal construct of which emotions are psychological
manifestations (Parret 1986, esp. 67-91).
27. The issue of expression is part of a broader issue of the universality of emotions. Izard claims that enough evidence has been accumulated
to prove that the basic emotions "have the same expressions and experiential qualities in widely different cultures from virtually every continent
on the globe, including isolated preliterate cultures having had virtually
no contact with Western civilization" (1977, 6).
28. According to some linguists, expressive (emotive) verbal signs
constitute a special functional language (Stankiewicz 1989); they certainly seem to be governed by special illocutionary rules (see Alston 1964,
4r48; Parret 1986, 157).
29. The most influential account of akrasia in ancient philosophy
was Aristotle's. We have to bear in mind, however, that this account has
several strands and inspired many (often conflicting) interpretations; for
a summary, see Charles 1984 (esp. 109-96).
30. The account of akrasia as a conflict of motivations chimes with
Donagan's presentation of Aristotle's view: the agents' incontinence is attributed "either to their not choosing according to the conclusion
reached (weakness), or to their not carrying their deliberation through
(impetuosity). And he [Aristotle] puts both failures down to passion"

Notes to Pages 70-73
(1987, 148). Similarly, de Sousa singles out emotion as the factor that
"plugs one argument over another into the motor system," which results
in akratic acting (1987, 200; see also Schick 1991, uo-15; Audi 1993,
319-33).
31. The "impulsive character" of instinct-motivated acting was clearly
recognized by William James. In Sigmund Freud's model of the mind,
the role of the primary mover of acting is assigned to the unconscious.
Benjamin B. Wolman explains its impact on acting by the fact that "the
unconscious processes are characterized by a high tension of unbound
energy that presses for immediate discharge." In contrast, the secondary,
conscious processes "reflect quiescent energy, controlled action, and delay in the discharge of energy dictated by survival considerations" (1968,
rn). Mardi J. Horowitz, contemplating the dynamics of conscious acts of
will and unconsciously made choices, comes to the conclusion that
"there is both a top-down and a bottom-up interaction of conscious and
unconscious thinking" (1988, 183). Austin invents a little story to prove
that intentionality is not canceled in impulsive acting: "We walk along
the cliff, and I feel a sudden impulse to push you over, which I promptly
do: I acted on impulse, yet I certainly intended to push you over, and
may even have devised a little ruse to achieve it" (1970, 195).
32. Pears supplements this view of irrationality when he defines it as
"a failure to make proper use of information" (1984, 7).
33. A view has been expressed that "calculating the product of two
numbers on a blackboard is certainly an action, but calculating it in one's
head seems to me not quite properly called an action:" (Brown 1968, 29).
Yet even before this artificial distinction was made, the concept of mental act was defended independently by Geach (1957) and Galperin (1957).
Ricoeur accepts its legitimacy, pointing out that "there is no reason why
we could not call ' act' the effort to think of a name or solve a problem''
(1977, 93). Donagan, using Brown's example, rejects his distinction:
"Human beings make calculations not only on their fingers and on paper, but also in their heads; and the latter are as good specimens of full
human actions as the former" (1987, 23; see also Danto 1973, 142-43).
34. The polarity is well known in psychology and philosophy.
Berlyne differentiates between "autistic" and "directed" thinking (1965,
19), Frankfurter between "thought acts" and "obsessive thoughts." The
latter "we find occurring within us .... Although these thoughts are
events in the histories of our minds, we do not participate actively in
their occurrence" (1988, 59). Psychologists have acknowledged the con-

247

Notes to Pages 1r18
tribution of modern fiction (particularly that of James Joyce and Virginia
Woolf to the "discovery" of the spontaneous "flow of experience":
"While the psychologist stumbled, stuttered, then froze into a paralyzed
silence, the artist responded with graceful enthusiasm to the challenge
William James ... set forth in his chapter 'The Stream of Thought' "
(Pope and Singer 1978a, 2). The idea of the generative power, of a "continuously active" brain, was embraced by postbehavioristic psychology:
"We are exposed almost continuously not only to a complex of stimulation from the external environment, but to a potential elaborate stimulus-field provided by the actual workings of our brain" (Singer 1978, 214).
35. Whe~her the dream has a source in personal experience or not
(see Dennett 1978, 129-48, versus Malcolm 1959) does not affect its character as a spontaneously generated mental process. Fictional narratives
are a rich source of dreams, with various functions and interpretations.

Ill· Multiperson Worlds
1. An English critic called The Idiot "a failure" because it is "forced,
hysterical, hyperbolic,nasty, and boring" Qones 1983, x). The critic does
not find it necessary to argue this preposterous claim; he simply excises
the novel from his own boring book.
2. The firmness of the author's intent is put in doubt when we learn
from Dostoevsky's notebooks about the many contradictory conceptions
of the hero in the drafts (see Wasiolek 1967, 12-16).
3. The portrait is a sign in the strict sense because Myskin reads off
from Nastasja Filipovna's face her character in all its contradictions (68;
100; see van der Eng 1957, 85-86).
4. The impersonal form of the verb desire, available in Russian
("jemu zachotelos' ") but not in English, is crucial for expressing the
spontaneity of the mental event. It is worth noting that not having acted
on the spontaneous desire and having deliberated for "less than ten minutes," the prince does not take the "step."
5. A model case ofloss of control is the self-induced incapacitation
by drunkenness. Dostoevsky's fictional world is full of drunkards and
drunken scenes. In The Idiot, drunkenness contributes to motivating one
of its most dramatic episodes, Rogozin's offer to Nastasja Filipovna (bk.
1, chap. 16; 111.1.4 below). For a secondary character, General Ivolgin,
drunkenness is a permanent state; and he is not only an alcoholic but
also a compulsive liar.

Notes to Pages 78-82
6. Chaos creates an extraordinarily dynamic fictional world, an often
noted feature of Dostoevsky's poetics (Grossman 1925, 178; Bachtin
[1929] 1984, 156; van der Eng 1957, 61; Lord 1970, viii).
7. It was Bachtin who pointed out the prominence of scandal in
Dostoevsky's fictional world. He considers the "scandal scenes" to be
characteristic of the Menippean satire, of which Dostoevsky's narratives
are a modern manifestation ([1929] 1984, 117). Lotman sees a close link
between scandal and miracle in Dostoevsky's world, because "they are
both unmotivated and abnormal" (1990, 167).
8. According to van der Eng's general observation, Dostoevsky
"avoids making any effort to rationalize the mystery and to reduce it to
simple elements" (1957, 81).
9. The relevance of the role cannot be expressed more strongly than
by the definite descriptions assigned to Society's anonymous representatives: Bar, Bishop, Guard, Physician (see STIL2).
10. Dickens' institutions are no less fictional than everything else in
his world. Having done his homework, House came to the conclusion
that Little Dorrit is "a satire on social and financial conditions which belong more truly to the crisis of the late 'forties than to that of the middle
'twenties, with which they are apparently meant to be connecte~(1942,
29). What appears as anachronism to a mimetic study confirms our antimimetic stance: fictional society does not (does not have to) correspond
to a specific social reality.
11. Miller (1965) makes the obvious connection between Dickens'
and Kafka's bureaucratic institutions. What Dickens' and Kafka's fictional constructs certainly share was well expressed by Magnet: "The
necessary public authority erected by men to guarantee the social contract has an inherent tendency to resolve itself into nothing more than
the violence at its disposal. It thus perpetually presents the threat of becoming as savage as the savagery it was instituted to civilize" (1985, 6).
Spilka 1963 is a detailed study of the Dickens-Kafka connection. See
VIIl.3 below.
12. Prison as a fictional entity spills over into the texture by the ubiquitous prison metaphor (see Reid 1967, 27). As can be expected, each
critic assigns to the key symbol of the novel a meaning derived from his
or her interpretive ideology. In an existentialist vein, Miller reads into it
"a religious or metaphysical meaning ... as well as a psychological and
social one. To be in this world ... is to be in prison, and this condition
will apparently persist as long as life itself" (1965, 228-29). Holloway his-

249

Notes to Pages 82-85
toricizes the existential interpretation: ''All are prisoners through the
force of an idea characteristic of the mid-nineteenth century, with its
deep sense of causal law and long temporal continuity: the present is imprisoned in the past' (1967, 22). For Frye the symbol signifies "a self-imprisoning society, locking itself in to the invariable responses of its own
compulsions" (1968, 65). According to Showalter, "the prisons of Little
Dorrit ... have strongly sexual connotations. Like the Gorgon, they
paralyse, engulf, and emasculate" (1979, 39). We should be warned, however, against interpreting Little Dorrit as a novel whose fictional world is
dominated exclusively by the image of the prison. First, an equally frequent countertheme, travel, brings into the novel the dialectic of "the
restlessness of travel and the stasis of imprisonment" (Thurley 1976,
230). Second, as Carey soberly reminds us, we should be wary of spreading the prison symbol too broadly and too thinly: "There can be very little meaning in such assertions as 'Society is a prison' or 'All the world's a
prison.' ... If society is a prison, then there's no great difference between
being in prison and out of it" (1973, n4).
13. In an allusion to Indians in a poem by Pope, Mrs. Merdle deals a
blow to any idealism by an irrefutable tautology: "If a few thousand persons moving in Society, could only go and be Indians, I would put my
name down directly; but as, moving in Society, we can't be Indians, unfortunately-" (289).
14. In Dickens' universe most narrative roles are doubled by a caricature. The caricature of the antisocial rebel is Rigaud. In his "rebellion,"
Rigaud applies criminally the means that Society uses legally: "I sell anything that commands a price. How do your lawyers live, your politicians,
your intriguers, your men of Exchange? ... Society sells itself and sells
me: and I sell society'' (818).
15. The accidental happenings outrage critics who believe in the classicist poetics of narrative necessity. But Van Ghent, in one of her spectacular insights, recognizes their significance and role in Dickens' fictional world: "Dickens' ~e of physical coincidence in his plots is
consistent with his imagination of a thoroughly nervous universe ....
Coincidence is the violent connection of the unconnected" (1950, 428).
And we can add: considering "the brilliant randomness of everyday life"
(Rescher 1995), Dickens' fictional world is certainly more realistic than
the normative world of actional necessity.
16. At this point, it is not relevant that Miss Wade later explained
that she joined the Marseilles group intentionally.

Notes to Pages 85-87
I7. Holloway rephrased the idea by stating that "everything is related
to everything" through "a gradual and inevitable convergence of disparates" (1967, 15, 26). Leavis uses a telling geometrical figure to express
the characteristic of the agential constellation formed by accidents:
through chancy encounters characters from quite different groupings associate in "significant" relationships. "If in our diagrammatic notation
we have been representing groupings by lines linking names, the lines
run across one another in an untidy and undiagrammatic mess" (1970,
218).
18. It was perceived both by Sklovskij and by Frye that the main mys-

teries in Dickens' world are mysteries of the past. But they are given very
different explanations. For Sklovskij they mean that "in every minute detail general laws of art are manifest" (1929, 174). Frye points out the
"sharp contrast" between "the traditional mystery of birth'' and "the mystery of death on which the modern whodunit is based" (1968, 54).
19. Tender hearts fall into Frye's category of "norm-figures." They
"resemble humors only in the fact that their responses are predictable,
but they are predictable in terms of a norm" and thus "encourage the
reader to identify with them" (1968, 70).
20. The word "good-natured' is House's; he uses it with respect to
"benevolent" characters, represented in Little Dorrit by Mr. Meagles
(House 1942, 39), but it is equally appropriate for the tender hearts.
21. Miller finds an analogy between Amy Dorrit and Dostoevsky's
prince Myskin, "a person who is altogether good" (111.r), but claims that
"Dickens' conception of the drama of absolute human goodness" is
"much less subtle than Dostoyevsky's" (1965, 240, 242). Woodward
(1975) sees only the contrast between Amy and Miss Wade (rebellion/
submission, self-assertion/self-effacement, passion/placidity), not noticing that Amy's passivity is no less a rejection of society than Miss Wade's
activism. Rotkin does not exempt Little Dorrit (and Arthur Clennam)
from the general pattern of deception that, in her opinion, permeates the
novel. She can do so only at the price of gross misinterpretations, the
most serious of them being her claim that Amy shows "incestuous impulses" toward her father (1989, 63-66). Fortunately for Amy and for us,
Rotkin acknowledges that "the reader is unlikely to take into account the
subliminal sexuality to which Dickens is alluding because of the show of
filial duty in Amy's behavior" (1989, 66).
22. In the light of her overall character and narrative role, it is preposterous to claim that Amy "securely belongs" to social conventions

Notes to Pages 87-9I
(Smith 1984, 2r28). Only in one case, in her last conversation with Mrs.
Clennam, is Amy explicit in formulating an ideology, two conceptions of
Christianity (861). Here, however, she is a mouthpiece for Dickens' own
rhetoric and a follower of his own strategy: to "strike a good religious
note without committing himself beyond the common stock of Christian phrases" (House 1942, no).
23. At this point, the contrast between Clennam and Amy's father
becomes quite obvious: Dorrit not only accepts but exploits Amy's selfsacrifice.
24. According to Porter, the "over-riding theme" of Kundera's narrative is "comic love against a background of social change" (1981, 14).
25. Variation has been generally recognized as the essential method of
Kundera's work (see Le Grand 1984, 59; Kleberg 1984, 65-69; Brand
1987; Molesworth 1987, 79; Chvadk 1989, 32; 1994, 13). According to Le
Grand, the method leads to knowledge by means of play: "Cognition no
longer takes the causal road, but the ludic road of chance and imagina-

tion" (1984, 60).
26. Both books, but particularly the novel, are representative ofKundera's narratives in yet another respect: their text is a synthesis of several
genres of writing: "In this novel we encounter Kundera the consummate
essayist on questions of culture and politics in Eastern Europe, Kundera
the spinner of ironic erotic tales which probe the interrelationships
among sex, power, and love, Kundera the acerbic and playful satirist of
'socialist realist' literary mores, cliches, and types, Kundera the inventor
of surreal and fantastic parables, as well as Kundera the autobiographer
reflecting explicitly on his personal experiences and convictions and on
the unanswerable dilemmas which have shaped him as a thinker and a
writer" (Eagle 1984, 251). Kleberg derives this "multiplicity'' of text genres
from the tradition of the Menippean satire (1984, 64); Lodge, speaking
about a "heterogeneous text," connects it with the postmodernist writing of Kurt Vonnegut in Slaughterhouse Five (1984, n6). Olejniczak believes that in Kundera's textual collage the essay takes the most prominent place (1988, 164-65).
27. Critics have observed and Kundera has confirmed-by his admiration for Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy (1990, 160-62), by his
"hommage" to Denis Diderot's Jacques and His Master-that his work
has more in common with eighteenth-century literature than just the
theme of libertinism (see Liehm 1980, 50-51; Welt 1988, 189; Nemcova
Banerjee 1989).

Notes to Pages 97-I02
IV: Interaction and Power
I. The indeterminacy is only slightly alleviated by the fact that rational acting "makes and maintains" regularities in the world (Porn 19 77 ,
8_2). Unfortunately, all persons at some times and some persons at all
times pursue modes of acting that are not rational.
. . 2. This severe li~!tation ?f an~ytic philosophy has been rightly crit~cized by Habermas: Analytic action theory has been fruitful for clarifymg the structures of purposeful activity. However, it is limited to the
atomistic model of action by an isolated actor and does not consider the
~echanisms for coordinating action through ~hich interpersonal relations come about. It conceptualizes action on the presupposition of exactly one world of existing states of affairs and neglects those actor-world
relations that are essential to social interaction'' (1984, 273-74). Berger and
Luckmann had already proposed a "dialectic" of the individual and society, where the individual "simultaneously externalizes his own being into
the social world and internalizes it as an objective reality" (1966, n9).
3. ~f the conste_l!ations are linked by one recurrent person, we speak,
fo~lowmg SklovskiJ (1929, 88-90), about "stringing" or "threading" of
episodes. Its ~est example is the picaresque novel: the picaro-protagonist
~asses success~vely through several fictional domains with separate agential constellations. When no link exists between the constellations, as is
the case in some modern narratives (III.3.3: Kundera's The Book of
Laughter and Forgetting), the cohesion of the fictional world is strained
and a loose narrative structure, transitional between a story cycle and a
novel, is created.
4. The existence of compositionally structured agential constellations
was recognized in the early stage of twentieth-century narratology (German "rhetorical school," Russian school of"compositional analysis") (see
Dolezel 1990, 129, 139).
5- The force of communication is most tellingly revealed in its ability to kill. Commenting on the tragedy of Ellenore in Benjamin Constant's Adolphe, Todorov writes: "It is Adolphe's letter to baron de T***
that will kill Ellenore. Nothing is more violent than language" (1971 , 101).
. 6. Ea~h- person's ~owledge and beliefs define him or her as a subjective cognmve domam; cognitive motivation is thus closely associated
with epistemic modalities (Y.p).
7. Moscovici's study of the introduction of psychoanalysis into
French intellectual life is of general import for understanding the differ-

253

Notes to Pages Io2-I05
ent formations and transformations of social representations. In the process, psychoanalysis went through three stages: "a) the scientific phase of
its elaboration from a theory by a scientific discipline (economics, biology, etc.); b) the 'representative'phase in which it diffuses within a society
and its images, concepts and vocabulary are recast and adapted; c) the
ideological phase in which the representation is appropriated by a party, a
school of thought or an organ of state and is logically reconstructed so
that a product, created by the society as a whole, can be enforced in the
name of science" (1984, 58).
8. Analogous dichotomies are observed in group attitudes: the conformism of mass culture contrasts with the "avant-garde practice" that
construes its representations "in opposition to the pressures of conformity'' Oodelet 1984, 237).
9. If we speak about power in the one-person world ("power of nature," "physical or mental powers of the person"), we use the term
metaphorically.
10. The concept of erotic cluster and the rejection of determinism in
social motivation jointly save us from the claim that "all human sexual
behavior is socially scripted behavior": "Combining such elements as desire, privacy, and a physically attractive person of the appropriate sex, the
probability of something sexual happening will, under normal circumstances, remain exceedingly small until either one or both actors organize
these behaviors into an appropriate script" (Gagnon and Simon 1973,
19). Such a rationalization of erotic activity deprives it of its characteristic spontaneity and unpredictability.
11. Here is a sampling of such ideologies: an imaging digression-"If
two people love each other, there can be no happy end to it" (Hemingway, Death in the Afternoon); a critic's paraphrase-"By the fructifying
power of sex ... we are saved from a narrow and withering egotism that
is the bane of modern civilized man" (Charney, summarizing the erotic
ideology ofD. H. Lawrence and Henry Miller [1981, 93]); a psychologist's reflection-"It would seem that only in our [Western] societies has
the idealization of sex in the form of romantic love reached ... an excessive pitch.... Consequently, sexual behaviour has acquired an attractiveness altogether out of proportion to its actual pleasure and its biological importance" (Vernon 1969, 43).
12. Charney emphasizes the drive motivation in the world of sexual
fiction: "Sex is an instinct that cannot be denied. Once aroused, especially
by a glimpse or touch of the sex organs, the instinct presses for fulfillment

254

Notes to Pages I05-III
regardless of obstacles. The human will is no match against the forces of nature, so that it is rare for the sex instinct to be diverted once it is activated.
Everything happens with magical swiftness and inevitability'' (1981, 73).
13. According to Foucault, it was de Sade who constructed erotics
subjected "to the unrestricted law of a power which itself knows no other
law but its own" (1978, 149).
14. The phrase comes from Alexander Puskin's story, "The Queen of
Spades."
15. Social scientists speak about "unidirectional influence situation,"
described as follows: "One social entity, A, attempts to get another, B, to
do something which is contrary to B's desires or tendencies. B's responses
are contrary to Xs desires and conflict exists either until B complies with
Xs requests or until A alters his desires" (Raven and Kruglanski 1970, 72;
see also Deutsch 1991, 30; Loyd and Emery 1994, 34).
16. Debate (Rapoport 1960) is a moderated form, verbal dueling
(Abrahams 1962) a ludic ritualized form, of this type of conflict.
17. The distinction between the verbal and the physical forms has
been known in rhetoric under the terms "logomatic" and "hoplomatic"
conflict (see Trojan 1924, 96).
18. Nicholson pointed out that many personal and international conflicts are not rational and cannot be accounted for by the game theory;
frequently, the conflict is motivated and fed by "basic passions such as
fear, aggression, anxiety and the impulse to violence" (1991, 66-74).
19. Deutsch's definition of the group-"an entity consisting of people who are aware of being psychologically bound together by mutually
linked interests" (1973, 49)-applies truly to small groups only. But only
in "primitive" societies do "the small, family-type units account for all or
almost all human 'interaction' " (Olson 1971, 18). In advanced societies
"a far greater part is played by non-kinship structures like states,
churches, the larger business firms, universities and professional societies" (Parsons and Bales 1955, 9; qtd. from Olson 1971, 18).
20. According to Macmurray, community "rests upon a positive apperception by its members of the relation which unites them as a group.
It is a personal, not an impersonal unity of persons" (1961, 147).
21. "Institutions ... by the very fact of their existence, control human conduct by setting up predefined patterns of conduct, which channel it in one direction as against the ma:ny other directions that would
theoretically be possible .... To say that a segment of human activity has
been institutionalized is already to say that this segment of human activ-

2 55

Notes to Pages Iu-u2
ity has been subsumed under social control" (Berger and Luckmann
1966, 52).
22. A similar polarity of "acting" and "structure" appears in modern
hermeneutics (see Widdershoven 1984).
23. In the introduction to the French original of their book, Crozier
and Friedberg use the dialectics of power to launch a critique "of this
purely negative and repressive conception of power _affi~me~ in the l~st
few years throughout the various analytical trends (mst1t~t1onal: ~~c10analytic, etc.) and in economic, psychiatric and pedagogic~ cnt1c1s~,
whether neomarxist or simply radical; it is a conception which sees, m
the existence of power relations and the problems it raises, the simple, almost pathological, product and proof of the immensity of the structure
of authority, proof of a certain mode of social domination, of an Establishment that it would suffice to break in order to make the problems of
power immediately vanish'' (1980, 26-27). Storr's telling image (derived
from the study of authentic documents of confinement) shows that even
in the most severe institutional restrictions the person preserves some
freedom of action: "Even the prisoner who agrees to be totally at the
mercy of his captors can retain some degree of autonomy:
for example deciding whether to eat the bread he is given, or to save It for future
consumption'' (1988, 48).
24. Let us record for future use the features of the French"style bureaucracy, as constructed by Crozier and Friedberg: "impersonal rules,
which largely prescribe, often in great detail, organizational tasks and positions, and specify how each member should behave; highly intensive
centralization of the decision-making power, which places great distance
between those who decide and those who are affected by their decisions;
stratification of individuals in homogeneous groups, separated from one
another by often insuperable barriers; and, finally, the development of
parallel power relationships around zones of uncertainty unforeseen, and
as a result uncodified and unregulated, in the organization chart and formal guidelines" (1980, 98).
25. Berger and Luckmann use the Marxian term reification to refer to
this transformation: "Reification is the apprehension of the products of
human activity as ifthey were something else than human productssuch as facts of nature, results of cosmic laws, or manifestations of divine
will. Reification implies that man is capable of forgetting his own authorship of the human world, and further, that the dialectic between
man, the producer, and his product is lost to consciousness" (1966, 82).

b!

Notes to Pages u3-II8

V.: Narrative Modalities
r. The study of modalities in fictional semantics finds much inspiration in modal logic; but we have to look also to other disciplines that
concern themselves with specific properties and functions of modalities,
such as semiotics, social anthropology, ethics, legal theory, epistemology,
axiology, etc.
2. The role of modality in acting is formally expressed in von
Wright's TIM-calculus, where T stands for the moment of ch;mge, I for
the set of possible state-changes, M for modal restrictions (von Wright
1968, 50). Propp's well-known system (1928) includes the modal notions
of "prohibition'' and "lack," which generate the stories of transgression
and quest respectively. Greimas was the first to formulate the
macrostructural function of modalities: ''A modal category takes charge
of the contents of the message and organizes it by establishing a certain
type of relationship between the constituent linguistic objects" (1966,
133). Later, speaking specifically about narrative theory, Greimas observed that "for a long time the construction of a semio-narrative grammar was seen as a development of modal grammar" ([1983] 1987, 165).
His system of modalities (proposed in Greimas [1976] 1987) is the crux
of Greimasian semiotics, used to theorize such fundamental topics as individual and social acting (IV.4), passions (II.5.3), etc.
3. The number of these systems, four, is not magical. In accordance
with the general character of our fictional semantics, narrative modalities
are declared an open set. If other semantic categories are identified logically as modalities and proved significant for the formation of narrative
worlds, then they should be accepted into the set.
4. This formulation guards us against the naive view that persons of
the natural fictional world are (or should be) "real people." On the other
hand, it encompasses, say, those extraterrestrial beings who are constructed as physically possible.
5. The human condition becomes tragic with narratives of paradise
lost or of a golden age past (V.5.1). The stories of human heroes of ancient myths are "stories of disasters and suffering, sometimes surmounted, more often simply endured. They tell of quarrels, stratagems,
labors, and especially battles" (Redfield 1975, 31).
6. The opposition codexal/subjective modality is derived from
Hilpinen. He speaks about codexal modalities, validated by a supraindividual source (society, group, culture), and relativized modalities, "used

2 57

Notes to Pages n8-r24
in situations in which some possible state of affairs is assumed to depend
on the properties of certain particular individuals" (1969, 182). Hilpinen's
distinction, which applies to all modal systems (V.3-5), is an important
conceptual tool for fictional semantics. In order to avoid a possible misunderstanding-codexal modalities can also be "relativized" to a certain
group--our term for person-specific modalities differs from Hilpinen's.
Each fictional person is characterized by his or her own set of subjective
operators and thus linked to other persons of the world by different
modal relations.
7. This double bondage has been perceived by von Wright: "The
possibility of a certain action or life may be said to depend on two factors. It depends first of all upon the agent's ability, upon what he can do
in the various acting-situations. But it also depends upon what actingsituations are possible in nature, upon the opportunities for actions
which nature (including other agents) will 'allow' " (1968, 49).
8. "To promulgate a norm is to assert that it is in force, and the assertion is made by producing a norm-statement" (Porn 1970, 61).
9. "Jephthah promised the Lord to sacrifice the first living being he
met on his return home from war, ifthe Lord gave him victory in battle.
Jephthah was victorious-and the first living being he met when he
came home was, alas, not a ram, but his daughter. Promises ought to be
kept-so Jephthah ought to take his daughter's life. But the Lord had
also said-'Thou shalt not kill'-so Jephthah must not take his daughter's life. So whatever poor Jephthah does, he will sin'' (von Wright 1968,
79; see also Follesdal and Hilpinen 1971, 29). Ehrmann described the
predicament of Corneille's Cinna in terms of"exchange": "Cinna cannot
cull benefits ... except by acquiring them at the price of treason" (1970,
223, 231). The case of Hamlet should be added to the stories of predicament; it focuses on "paralysis of acting," a common consequence of this
deontic condition.
rn. The ludic nature of Svejk's acting was first noticed by Milan
Jankovic (1966). The term itself was applied to Svejk's overall strategy by
Hana Arie Gaifman (1984). This interpretation puts to rest the often repeated but unsubstantiated claim that Svejk is a coward or a shirker.
IL In his "logic of preference" (a close relative of axiology), von
Wright claims that "a preference ... is necessarily relative to a subject. A
preference is always somebodjs preference.... A preference, moreover, is
relative, not only to a subject but also to a certain moment or occasion
or station in the life of a subject. Not only may people have different

Notes to Pages r24-I28
preferences, but one and the same man may revise his preferences in the
course of his life" (1963a, 12, 13). However, we should not dispense with
codexal values: "The interpersonal reasons for action ... remain such whatever the attitudes (or the relations) of actual valuers" (Attfield 1987, 37).
12. Deutsch labels these two kinds of attitude as "promotive" and
"contrient" and defines (in a rather pedantic style) the resulting "behavior" as follows: "Promotive behavior toward an event is behavior directed
at increasing, or preventing a decrease in, the probability of the event's
occurrence; promotive behavior toward a person is behavior directed at
increasing, or preventing a decrease in, that person's well-being.... Contrient behavior toward an event is behavior directed at decreasing, or
preventing an increase in, the probability of that event's occurrence; contrient behavior toward a person is behavior directed at decreasing, or preventing an increase in, that person's well-being" (1973, 150).
13. Pecorin's "moral tenet" should stand here as a memorial to the nihilist's destructive egotism: "There is boundless delight in the possession
of a young barely unfolded soul! It is like a flower whose best fragrance
emanates to meet the first ray of the sun. It should be plucked that very
minute and after inhaling one's fill of it, one should throw it away on the
road" (284; 123).
14. Calinescu starts with an epistemic concept of secret as "information deliberately set aside, withheld or disguised," but when considering
secrets in and of literary texts he ends up with a broad conception"hidden patterns, verbal or structural, textual or intertextual" that the
reader uncovers or even creates (1994, 443, 463). In other words, he
equates the "secrecy'' of the literary text with implicitness, dealt with in
chapter VII below.
15. Bildungsroman is often claimed to be a genre of German literature, but its existence in other national literatures has been well documented. Thus, for example, Buckley (1974) gathered under this label
many prominent English novels, from Dickens' David Copperfield
through Joyce's A Portrait ofthe Artist as a Young Man to contemporary
fictions. He points out that in English literature the hero of the Bildungsroman is often "an artist of sorts" (1974, 13), just as is typical of the
German prototype.
16. "The law forestalls the excesses of a raging tribal revenge, but also
serves to convert the cultural prejudices of the community into a more
organized form .... The sense of unity the English have comes not from
a genuinely unifying vision of justice but from the partisan togetherness

2 59

Notes to Pages I28-I36
generated within the community in power.... As the trial gets underway, the European characters cease to function as individuals and take on
a collective identity, an identity in part defined by an increased, often
hysterical, insistence on the boundary between communities" (Horsley
1995, 212).
17. According to Ryan, modal tensions ("conflicts") are the prime

source of plot dynamics; in "the best of possible worlds" where no modal
conflicts existed, there would be no plots (1991, 120) ..
18. The mythological world is the source of all fantastic fiction. Calling it the "disjunctive mode," Traill describes the various modes of the
fantastic as "the various ways in which the supernatural and the natural
are configured within the fictional world" (1996, 18). It is also the base on
which the modern myth is formed (chap. VIII).
19. For other versions of the creation story, see Kirk 1970 (196-97).
20. It is not relevant for this discussion that Alice's visit is in the end
"naturalized," explained as a dream. The oneiric explanation does not
change the supernatural character ofWonderland (see Traill 1996, 16-17).

Starter Terms II
1. It was Carnap (1947) who introduced intension as a partner of extension, thus transforming the old logical opposition extension/comprehension. In the traditional usage, established especially by the Port Royal
Logic, extension means the set of objects designated by an expression, and
comprehension is the sum of the objects' properties. Expressions can be
defined either by extension or by comprehension (see Frisch 1969). The
extension of "lion" is the set of all lions; its definition by comprehension
will be something like a dictionary or encyclopedia entry: "A large carnivorous chiefly nocturnal cat (Pelis leo) of open or rocky areas of Africa
and esp. formerly southern Asia that has a tawny body with a tufted tail
and a shaggy blackish or darkbrown mane in the male" (Webster).
2. This formulation is dose to Dummet's paraphrase of Frege: "The
possession of reference by a word or expression consists in an association
between it and something in the world-something of an appropriate
logical type, according to the logical category to which the word belongs" (1973, 93; see also Kempson 1977, 13).
3. Compare the following statement: "In many languages, especially in
the language of mathematics and physics, only extensions play a role, so
that extensional semantics is sufficient for them" (Kutschera 1976, vii).

260

Notes to Pages IJ7-I39
4. Ducrot and Todorov postulated the language dep~ndence ofintensions and thus were able to establish a connection between Frege's
and Saussure's semantics: "The affinity of the opposition sense-referent
and the Saussurean opposition signifier-signified becomes striking if we
know that for Frege knowing the sense of an expression was a part of the
knowledge of language (which is not the case for the knowledge of the
referent)" (1972, 320). Grossmann's negative argument confirms the language-bound nature of intensional meaning: "Senses ... are not linguistic entities"; it follows that "there are no such entities as senses" (1969,
156, 164). In other words, if intensions are not linguistic entities, then
there are no intensions.
5. Within the Saussurean tradition, "inner form" of the expression
was recognized as a source of meaning by Mathesius (1947, 177). Within
the Fregean framework, the dependence ofintensions on linguistic forms
has been ascertained by the Russian logician B. V. Birjukov: "The sense
of a complex name is determined by the sense of its parts and the character of the rules according to which it.is constructed; its sense changes
when the sense of any of its parts changes. If we consider that the sense
of each part is determined by its linguistic character and that the rules
according to which the name is composed are fixed in the grammatical
structure of the name, then it becomes dear that the sense of the name
is expressed by means of language and only thus" (1964, 62). Neither
Mathesius nor Birjukov established a connection between Frege's and
Saussure's semantics.
6. Kristeva stated this principle of poetic language in general terms:
"The praxis of literature is the exploration and discovery of the possibilities oflanguage; ... it is a dynamics that breaks the inertia oflinguistic
habits and offers to the linguist a unique possibility to study the emergence of the signification of signs" (1969, 117-18).
7. The argument for the "impossibility'' of translation rests precisely
on this assumption. We can resolve the paradox that translation is both
"impossible" and widely practiced only. if we accept the fact that translation cannot and does not convey exactly the intensional meaning of the
original; rather, it aims at its maximal approximation. To achieve this
goal, the translator of a literary (poetic) text has to use various strategies
of substitution. As a communicative activity, translation is not a transposition of intensional meaning from one language to another but the
rudimentary form ofliterary transduction (see Ep. 2).
8. Global regularities operate, as a rule, throughout the text, but
261

Notes to Pages I39-I47
there are stylistically unhomogeneous texts, especially in modernist and
postmodernist fiction. They consist of textural segments ruled by different principles (e.g., narrated in different narrative modes). These cases
do no invalidate our method but present an additional challenge: How
are the unhomogeneous segment, organized into the overall texture and,
consequently, into the global intensional meaning?
9. I follow Linsky in claiming that the difference between proper
name and definite description implies a difference in intension: "Two
correferential singular terms cannot be identical in sense if one is a rigid
designator [i.e., a proper name] and the other is not" (Linsky 1977, 68;
see also Kempson 1977, 14; Santambrogio and Violi 1988, 8). I speak
about standard usage of proper names, because a writer might resurrect
the intension hidden in the name's etymology-Dickens' Mr. Gradg;rind,
Zola's Albine-or even create a neologism of a "telling name"-Maupassant's Hor/a (see Hamon 1977, 150).

VI: Authentication
1. Linguists who claim that all sentences are performative (at least at
the deep structure level) completely ignore Austin's basic requirement:
that the performative interfere in the world. For a criticism of the "performative hypothesis," see Lycan (1984, 133).
2. The character of literature as performative has been noticed by
Barthes: "Writing [in the sense of ecriture] can no longer designate an
operation of recording, notation, representation, 'depiction' (as the Classics would say); rather, it designates exactly what linguists, referring to
Oxford philosophy, call a performative" (1977, 145). Barthes did not go
beyond this passing remark. Earlier, but no less casually, the performative character of the literary text was suggested by Iser (1971, 6-7).
3. If we want to suggest, as advised by Austin, an "explicit performative verb" (1970, 245) for fictional performatives, then my candidate is
"Let it be."
4. Austin (1970, 154-74) and Kirkham (1992, 138) object to this use
of fact, but this objection can be met if we differentiate between representation-dependent "facts" and representation-independent "states of
affairs."
5. A sharp distinction between author and narrator is an axiom of
modern narrative theory (see Kayser 1958, 91; Barthes 1966, 19). The "sayso semantics" of fictionality (Woods 1974, esp. 35, 133), where the entire

Notes to Pages I47-I49
narrative text is assigned to the author, has to be modified accordingly.
6. It has been known since antiquity, from Plato to the Latin grammarian Diomedes, that the narrative text is unhomogeneous (see Curtius
1948, 439-40; Dolezel 1973, 3). The modern investigations of the narrative text plurality include Bally 1912, Bachtin 1929, Vinogradov 1930, and
Volosinov 1930. The literature of the recent decades is so vast that it can
be exemplified only by a randomly selected set: Genette 1972, Bal 1977,
Stanzel 1984; Chatman 1978, Lanser 1981, Lintvelt 1981; Banfield 1982.
Not surprisingly, I rely on my own conceptual system presented in
Dolezel 1973.
7. Martinez-Bonati is right when he states that we know there are
windmills in the fields because the narrator "has said so" (1973, 186).
However, he formulates his "say-so" semantics in the mimetic framework
and, therefore, assigns truth-value to the narrator's statement. He presumes that the narrator's statement is true because it corresponds to the
facts of the fictional world. But where is the fictional fact antecedent to,
or independent of, the narrator's speech act? The fundamental difference
between mimetic and possible-worlds semantics, clearly revealed here, is
the theory of authentication.
8. The position of the authoritative narrative in the text sequence is
not relevant. In the windmill scene from Don Quixote, the reader knows
beforehand what the fictional fact is; in the episode of the acquisition of
"Mambrino's helmet" (chap. 21), the hero first makes his claim, and only
then does the authoritative narrator construct the fictional fact. Especially telling are those cases where the authoritative narrator corrects or
confirms a fictional persons's opinion, as Trollope's narrator does in The

Eustace Diamonds:
Lady Eustace had found all the family jewels belonging to the Eustace family in the strong plate room at Portray Castle .... The
reader will be aware that this statement was by no means an accurate history.... It was, indeed, absolutely false (191).
That Lizzie Eustace had stolen the diamonds, as a pickpocket
steals a watch, was a fact as to which Mr. Camperdown had in his
mind no shadow of a doubt. And, as the reader knows, he was
right (289).
9. In the reader's reconstruction of the fictional world, the authorial
errors either go unnoticed or are ignored or negotiated away. But a
philosopher of fictionality falls for the red herring. Considering the lo-

Notes to Pages I43-I54
cation of Dr. Watson's war wound (shoulder or leg), Parsons (1980, 224)
not only does not see it as the author's error or inconsistency but also
takes for granted that the Dr. Watson from different Conan Doyle's stories is one and the same person. Let us add that authorial errors have
nothing to do with sophisticated textural strategies that introduce contradictions into the fictional world in order to construct impossible
worlds (VI. 4.2, Ep. 4).
10. A philosophically minded reader will think of the "coherence theory'' of truth. However, accepting coherence as a criterion of truth does
not commit us to the principles of this theory (see Kirkham 1992,
104-6).
11. This difference has been pointed out by Hamarneh in a fine
analysis of the dynamic aspects of authentication. He adds that "some of
these (but not all) tend to be text specific and not generalizable criteria'
(1991, 225).
12. A different source of subjectivization, the rhetoric of the narrator,
gives rise to the rhetorical mode of narrative. I leave this mode aside; it
has received a detailed treatment in Booth 1961 (see also Dold.el 1973,
59-60, 104-6). It is noteworthy that Booth does assign to the rhetorical
narrator the ability of introducing "facts" (see, e.g., 1961, 169). But we
must resist the American critic's claim that all narratives are by necessity
rhetorical (even though the rhetoric is often hidden or implicit). This
claim results from confusing narrator and author (see VI.2).
13. In the generalized theory of authentication, the dyadic function
becomes the limit of the graded function. But this theoretical reformulation does not change the fact that for the praxis of fictional narrative the
two-value function is basic. In the most adequate formal model the authentication function would be continuous; unfortunately, literary semantics is not advanced enough to operate with continuous functions.
We think of the graded function as a series of discrete intervals between
the two poles.
14. The zone is diversified ifidiolects of different fictional persons alternately modulate the Er-narrative, creating a multidimensional subjectivization (see Dold.el 1973, 114).
15. Bal has this narrative technique in mind when she speaks about
Flaubert's text's "oscillation between two focalizations" (1977, 95-97).
16. See Dold.el 1973, 8, for a differentiation of these variants. The
personal !ch-form, which concerns us here, is at hand when a person acting in the fictional world-usually the protagonist-performs the act of

Notes to Pages I54-I6I
narrating. In other words, the narrator exists and acts in the world he or
she constructs. Second-person narrative, quite popular since Michel Butor's La Modification (1957), has been noticed in the 1960s (Morissette
1975) but only now is receiving the theoretical attention it deserves (see a
special issue of Style (1994), no. 3). I doubt, however, that the existence of
the you-narrative requires a radical "rewriting" of"narrative paradigms"
(Fludernik 1994, 284). It is certainly not the first and only "nonnatural"
kind of narrative discourse. Moreover, the real test of the specificity of
the second-person narrative will come only if its authentication force is
examined. At first sight, it seems that in this respect it functions in a similar way as the !ch-form (see McHale 1987, 223; Herman 19946).
17. Modern interior monologue is equally nonnatural discourse.
How did Molly Bloom record her thoughts and feelings narrated in the
last chapter ofJames Joyce's Ulysses?
18. Genette describes in detail the fluctuation of Proust's "focalization'' (1972, 219-24) and appositely designates his narrative mode as poly-

modal.
19. It is by no means a unique instance of this narrative strategy.
Stanzel devotes an entire section of his book to "dying in the first-person
form," drawing our attention to the pioneer of the technique, Arthur
Schnitzler ("Fraulein Else") (1984, 229-32). Tammi mentions several
"posthumous narratives" written by Vladimir Nabokov (especially the
novel Transparent Things); he points out that they violate an "old rule"
formulated by the fictionist himself: "The I of the book cannot die in the
book" (1985, 14r56). Hutcheon tells us that the narrator in Rudy
Wiebe's The Scorched-Wood People (1977) "is made to tell the tale of the
historical Louis Riel from a point of time after his own death, with all
the insights of retrospection and access to information he could not possibly have had as participant" (1988, 117). Some postmodernist texts
"flesh out the posthumous voice more fully, surrounding it with some of
the circumstantial details of an afterlife" (McHale 1987, 230).
~o. For a meticulous presentation of the skaz technique, see Titunik
1977. Under the influence of some suggestions in Ejchenbaum's classical
paper ([1918] 1963), skaz has been often defined narrowly, as an oral storytelling mode with a potential addressee: "The storyteller or raconteur
addresses the tale to a possible interlocutor, who may or may not respond" (Banfield 1982, 172). In this conception, skaz is simply Ich-form
in oral style. The skaz of the original practitioners is more complex and
theoretically more interesting.

Notes to Pages I63-I67
21. Formally, a three-value truth-function of "free logic" could lead
us out of the restrictions of our metalanguage. But the semantic interpretation of such a function presents serious difficulties, well known to
both proponents and critics of free logics. Van Fraassen's attempt (1966)
to escape the restrictions ofbinarism is probably essential for future discussions of three-value systems (see also Lambert 1969, 106 and Haack

1974).
22. Chatman quotes this story and Borges' term bifurcation when
speaking about "antistory'' (1978, 56-57). Tammi points out that bifurcation is "an ancient device" in Nabokov's fiction (1985, 150). John
Fowles, in his well-known novel The French Lieutenant's Woman (1964),
proposes two alternative, mutually incompatible endings, one happy,
one tragic (see McHale 1987, 106-7, 109-110).
23. "The same events (albeit with variants) or fragments of events ...
are evoked at whatever level of representation-'real', or as represented
on the stage or the magazine cover, or as told by Manneret or the big
man with the red face" (Jefferson 1980, 55-56; see Ricardou 1973, 102-3).
The mixing of different modes of existence, including blending of the
actual and the fictional, is a prominent feature of modern visual art; its
telling demonstration is the cubistic collage that incorporates real objects
in paintings (see Hintikka 1975, 246).
24. The technique has been glimpsed by Sturrock in Robbe-Grillet's
first novel, Les Gommes; the text dramatizes "conditions under which a
novel comes into being, or rather tries to come into being" (1969, 172).
Morrissette has recovered an underlying coherent story of La Maison de
rendez-vous (1975, 260), but this story, it should be emphasized, does not
have the privilege of authenticity.
25. Genette's original definition of metalepsis (1972, 245) was broad
enough to include the blending of various orders of existence (such as
noted in Robbe-Grillet's La Maison de rendez-vous). In a later reformulation, Genette narrowed the concept to metafictional metalepsis, to the
cases "when an author (or his reader) is introduced in the fictional action
of his narrative or when a character of this fiction interferes in the extradiegetic existence of author or reader" (1983, 58).
26. One of the main themes of the third level is "a diegetic parody of
theories of implied readers" (Cotrupi 1991, 283). I am interested in
Calvino's novel as an instance of metafiction and, therefore, will leave
Cotrupi's third level aside.
27. Even minor auxiliary activities, such as cutting pages of a paper-

266

back with a paper knife (42), become part of the story of reading.
28. Maybach speaks about a "narrated reader," a reader "who takes
over an agential role in the text" (1990, 8).
29. Calvino's self-disclosing act includes book production into the
story of fiction making. Mishaps and accidents of printing and publishing are to a large extent responsible for the "interruptions" to which the
readers are subject.

Vll· Saturation
1. The consequences of constructing a complete fictional world
would be frightening: "If a piece of fiction accidentally turned out to be
a complete and completely accurate account of the entire (past, present
and future) history of the universe, then all characters created therein
would be identical with real objects" (Parsons 1980, 184).
2. Iser admits that "the indeterminacy of a text may be so resistant to
counterbalancing that any identification with the real world is impossible," which seems to leave the reader in a quandary. But Iser's reader disregards this major obstacle and proceeds with his repairwork anyway, either by "referring the text to real, verifiable factors" or by reducing the
text "to the level of his own experiences" (1971, 9).
3. The mimetic character of the reader's "repairwork'' is unwittingly
revealed by Barry Smith:

We can do no other, in our pre-theoretical commune with real objects and with the quasi-real objects of fiction, than ascribe all inadequacies in our knowledge to the side of epistemological incompleteness: this explains why our mode of reading works of
fiction is-from this point of view-almost identical with our
mode of reading not only historical works but also, e.g., newspaper reports concerning our contemporaries. In no case do we find
it possible, in our reading, to draw a line between indeterminacies
which are merely epistemological and indeterminacies which may
be contributed by the objects themselves. (1979, 381-82)
In other words, the reader of this theory disregards the specific ontology
of fictional objects and reads fictional literature in the same way as he or
she reads reports about the actual world, reports that can be legitimately
supplemented by his or her knowledge and experience. Fortunately, "the
literary theorist" is somehow able to transcend the "pre-theoretical com-

Notes to Pages I7I-I74
mune" with fictional objects. "In particular he must find a way of determining the axes along which epistemological fillings out of the various
different kinds may take place in such a way as to remain faithful to the
work and then, eventually, to yield a reading which is adequate to bring
to light the aesthetic qualities ofthe work" (1979, 390; emphasis added).
4- The reader who would decide to place this event in any actual or
imaginary place would do so arbitrarily, without any supporting evidence from the text. Most disconcertingly, the filling in would run
counter to the general geographical indeterminacy of Kafka's fictional
world and thus deprive it of one of its principal semantic effects, universality.
5. Later on, the texture confirms this fictional fact by Spanish words
in the persons' discourse (hombre, bodegas, copita) and especially by the
old waiter's macabre play with the word nada.
6. In rhetoric, the phenomenon of implicitness has been known
since antiquity. It was considered the most prominent among the figures.
Its most succinct definition is found in book 9 of Quintilian's Institutes
of Oratory.
7. The close connection between implicitness and interpretation can
be seen in Kerbrat-Orecchioni's monograph (1986); she devotes many
passages and an entire chapter (5) to the theory of interpretation.
8. Hasan has expressed the dependence of the implicit on the explicit
in a similar manner: "The explicit string is semantically self-sufficient; by
contrast, the implicit string involves a semantic dependence. The precise
meanings of the latter are not contained within itself but must be retrieved from some source extrinsic to the string" (1984, no). The implicit
is retrieved either from the co-text (endophorically) or from the situation
(exophorically).
9. The most telling of these signals are paratextual indexes, such as
intonation, mimes, gestures, etc. But one can argue that these indexes
(expressed in face-to-face communication and described or surrogated in
written texts) are explicit signifiers and the meaning they convey (e.g.,
irony) is therefore explicit meaning.
10. The broad notion of presupposition corresponds to the conception of inference in contemporary cognitive text theory (Nicholas and
Trabasso 1980; van Dijk and Kintsch 1983, 49-52; Kerbrat-Orrecchioni
1986, 161-298; Magliano and Graesser 1991, 195), where it designates all
competences and procedures of text comprehension, including, for example, the disambiguation of lexical units or recovery of pronominal

268

Notes to Pages r74-r82
(deictic) reference. But, obviously, these covert meanings require not logical inference but resort to the linguistic code, to the pragmatic conditions of the text, to a frame of reference (script), and so on.
11. Prince maintains that presupposition is different from implicit
meaning: "First, and most obviously, the latter is not stated whereas the
former is, though not directly'' (1982, 42). But it is precisely the stating
"not directly'' that characterizes implicitness.
12. There is a consensus in today's text theory that world knowledge
is necessary for text comprehension (van Dijk and Kintsch 1983, 46-49,
333-46; Magliano and Graesser 1991, 206). Its crucial role in the recovery
of implicit meaning has been emphasized by Eco (1979, 17-23), who
popularized the term encyclopedia (see also Kerbrat-Orecchioni 1986,
163-65). In cognitive research other terms can be found, such as background information, universe ofassumptions, basic cognitive system, and so
on. I believe, without being able to argue this view, that the so-called
pragmatic implicature, a popular topic since P. H. Grice's lectures (1975),
works only when a specific cognitive compartment of the encyclopedia
is activated, namely, the knowledge of the conventions of speech acts and
conversation. Compare: "To say that the speaker's intentions are public
in intentional communication is to say that the hearer knows them, that
the speaker knows that the hearer knows them, that the hearer knows
that the speaker knows that he [the hearer] knows them and so on'' (Recanati 1979, 182).
13. Today we use the term enthymeme primarily to designate an incomplete syllogism that calls for the recovery of an implicit premise. This
use goes back to Quintilian, who reformulated the original Aristotelian
concept.
14. For the argument I am developing here, it is irrelevant whether
La Manga is "a coastal city much resembling Cartagena'' (Bell-Villada
1990, 19) or "a composite image of Cartagena de Indias, Santa Maria,
Baranquilla and other locations on the Caribbean coast" (Fiddian 1987,
192). As I have repeatedly emphasized, the participation of actual-world
entities (realemes) in the construction of the fictional world-guessed at
by critics-does not change the fictional character of the construct.
15. For the concept of mental map, see IY.2.2. Mental map is a compartment of the encyclopedia, as shared communal knowledge about a
territory.
16. Mary Douglas recorded an interesting regularization of explicitness/implicitness in the culture of the African Lele: "Rules of hygiene

Notes to Pages I82-I90
and etiquette, rules of sex and edibility fed into or were derived from
submerged assumptions about how the universe works" (1975, x).

VIII· Modern Myth
1. It is irrelevant for our present discussion that the supernatural domain is subdivided into the upper, heaven, and the lower, the underworld. According to Kirk, this triad is characteristic of mythologies of
the most diverse cultural and geographical areas: "for example, it occurs
in India as well as among American Indians," not to speak about NearEastern and Greek mythology. This universality of the world's macrostructure is a serious challenge to research and cannot be explained away
as "too obvious" (Kirk 1970, 224).
2. The role of children in "A Crossbreed" should not go unnoticed.
Only children take the hybrid being without surprise, indeed, with delight and curiosity, and consider questions about its origins, its name, its
future, and its end meaningful.
3. The much disputed question, to which zoological species does the
metamorphosed Samsa belong, is irrelevant, considering the principles
of Kafka's semantics. It shows a mimetic perversion on the part of interpreters, their pedestrian attempts to "naturalize" Kafka's remarkable
imagination (see Steinmetz 1977, 33-34).
4. An interesting residuum of the hybrid-world structure can be
found in Kafka's last narrative, "Josephine the Singer, or the Mouse Folk"
Uosefine, die Sangering, oder das Volk der Mauser] (1924). The narrator
is a hybrid being belonging both to the mouse nation and to the human
species. The hybrid world becomes a narrative mode, so that the story
can be read as a standard animal tale.
5. Belyj and Kafka lived and wrote in similar historical, political, and
social conditions, in societies governed by the secretive, authoritarian,
and decaying power elites of the last czars and the last Hapsburgs. It is
certainly interesting to ask to what degree these exterior conditions
shaped Kafka's and Belyj's fictional worlds; a comparative semantic study
that describes this shaping is a necessary precondition for genetic, historical studies, rather than the reverse.
6. The narrative device of the telephone, which appears both in Belyj's Petersburg and in Kafka's The Castle, allows communication to take
place between visible-world persons and agents of the invisible institution without revealing the latters' identity.

270

Notes to Pages I93-20I
7. The unreliability of the informers is "laid bare" in the case of
Olga. She does not tell K. what she herself has experienced or observed
but transmits her brother's account (or what she claims to be his account). There is no reason why Barnabas could not convey the information directly to K., except for a structural reason: to introduce mediation
into the transmission and thereby increase the unreliability of the report.
Significantly, K. never asks Barnabas to confirm Olga's information.
8. This mistake is repeated naively without any questioning by the
majority of Belyj's interpreters.
9. The infinitude of the castle is indicated in Olga's report about its
reception office. The Court's infinite depth is explicitly asserted both by
Joseph K.'s advocate, Huld, and by his main informer, Tittorelli. Huld:
"the ranks and hierarchies of the Court are infinite" (88; 149). Tittorelli:
"the highest Court [is] quite inaccessible to you, to me, to all of us" (116;
197).
10. Demonicization of the invisible domain is quite common in

Kafka criticism (beginning already with Max Brod's interpretation of the
castle as the seat of divinity). But surely, such an interpretation reduces
Kafka's new semantics to the traditional semantic structure of classical
mythology.
11. The attempts of mimetic critics to find the locales of Kafka's novels on the map of Bohemia are not only primitive but counterproductive. Kafka could easily have named the city of The Trial Prague and the
castle of The Castle Sifem or Sirem. But that would, of course, destroy
the specific character of his myth.

Epilogue: Fictional Worlds in Transduction
1. Morgan (1989) and Clayton and Rothstein (1991) provide informative surveys of the rise of the idea of intertextuality.
2. Thai:s Morgan, who believes that "most ofliterature" is constituted
by "those texts in which the author imitates or borrows features from an
earlier text or set of texts" at least recognizes that "in the process [he]
changes or transforms these features to suit the characteristics of his own
previous work" (1989, 241). In fact, Morgan reformulates what structural
poetics stated about literary influence (see, e.g., Vodicka 1942, 361-63).
3. Culler designates the two sources as "anonymous intertextuality''
and "the presence of one text in another" (1981, 103-4).
4. It is necessarily such in Riffaterre's poetic semantics, where "the

271

Notes to Pages 20I-209
axis of signification is horizontal ... is carried out from signifier to signifier" and "the referent has no pertinence to the ana/,ysis" (1983, 35-36, 15;
emphasis in original).
5. Kristeva may have pointed in that direction when she wrote that
in postmodernism "the question of intertextuality is perhaps even more
important in certain ways, because it assumes an interplay of contents
and not of forms alone" (1989, 282; emphasis added).
6. There are other modes of fictional-world transduction between
translation and rewriting, such as retour de personnage (see McHale 1987,
57). But I do not deal with them here; my aim is to formulate sharply the
semantic problems of world transduction, and for this purpose the postmodernist rewrite is the most fecund source.
7. That is, "the politics of gender, race, class, ethnicity, and sexual
preference, to mention only the most obvious" (Hutcheon 1996, 213).
8. As if competing with Goethe, Plenzdorfhimself composed successively seven versions of his narrative (see Brenner 1982b, 347-48).
9. Plenzdorf's novel is typical of the emergence in the 1960s and
1970s of a counterofficial youth fiction in the former socialist countries-from the Soviet Union to Yugoslavia-particularly under the influence ofJ. D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye (1951). Taking his cue
from the celebration of jeans by Plenzdorf's hero, Aleksandar Flaker calls
this literature "jeans prose." It centers on a young protagonist who, as an
!ch-narrator, cultivates a style based on the city youth's slang and questions the archaic cultural conventions adopted by socialist realism. Flaker
emphasizes the prominence of intertextuality in jeans prose, which often
puts the new work in opposition to a classical text (1975, 22, 174). Could
it be that postmodernism was born under communism?
IO. It has been noted that several quotations are combinations of discontiguous passages of Goethe's text (Wapnewski 1982, 332-34). Wiebeau's appropriation of Werther is motivated by a remarkable mental feature: he "can memorize things from books fantastically. That was the real
suffering in my life" (30; 56). Wiebeau's Leiden start as literary to become
experiential.
II. Zaremba's understanding is in line with his role of the "old communist," a figure typical of jeans prose. The old idealist is close to the
young hero, in contrast to the stern officials of the totalitarian regime
(Flaker 1975, 96-97).
12. It is interesting to note that ideological critics minimize the connection between Goethe's and Plenzdorf's novels. In Marcel Reich-Ran272

Notes to Pages 209-2II
icki's opinion, rightly rejected by Jauss (1978, 321-22), Plenzdorf's recourse to Goethe's Werther is just "an amusing trick'' (1982, 264). The
ideological critic fails to understand that Plenzdorf's book, though necessarily bound to local historical and political conditions, expresses a universal postmodernist need to reevaluate the classical canon.
13. The multiple use of intertextuality in Plenzdorf's work is prefigured in Goethe's Werther. Blessin calls Werther "a reading hero" [ein
lesender Held] (1985, 9). Piltz, in his expert analysis of the novel's rich intertextuality, comes to the conclusion that Werther not only reads but
also lives and dies by literature (1983, 63).
14. Charlie informs Wiebeau's father that her name is not Charlotte
(23; 44). Edgard is fond of his Huguenot background and.insists on the
French pronunciation of his name.
15. Ideological sociocriticism reduces all modal restrictions to social
restrictions, to deontic norms imposed by a social system. It is amusing
to observe that in this interpretive framework Werther can be both "a
new man who is formed in the process of the preparation for the bourgeois revolution'' (Lukacs [1936] 1964, 57), and a "poetic dreamer who orders his restricted life circle according to a patriarchal idyll" and "cannot
be imagined as a fighting patriot or champion of the Rousseauan volonttf
gtfntfrale'' (Schlrpe 1970, 54, 90). These contradictory interpretations are
a necessary consequence of the reductionism of ideological criticism,
which brushes over fundamental semantic, modal constraints. The extant social system is not Werther's problem. He accepts it as something
given. He likes certain aristocrats and dislikes others, just as he feels sympathy for some Burgers and is repelled by others. Certainly, his attitude
toward the "common people" is on the whole positive but does not go
beyond the conventions of the pastorale (see also Vaget 1983, 18).
16. "In Plenzdorf's novel, the whole perception of a society with its
demands, norms, expectations is articulated with much greater emphasis
than in Goethe's Werther" (Swales 1987, 103). Not surprisingly, the critical reception of the novel in both former parts of Germany centered primarily around political issues (see Wang 1991, 96-103).
17. Goethe's text reinforces the focus on Werther's inner life by gapping the exterior conditions of his existence (compare VII.4 above). We
do not know why Werther is in Wahlheim, what he lives on (there are
hints that his mother provides him with money); his servant is mentioned only en passant and that in connection with his love for Lotte.
Material objects in his environment are constructed in a sketchy manner,

273

Notes to Pages 2II-2I4
the diminutives expressing a general emotional attitude rather than a
contrete shape: "ein Hiittchen," "ein Platzchen," "ein Tischlein'' [a little
hut, a small place, a little table] (9; 30). Nor does the text provide us with
any details about Werther's work for the ambassador, except for the fact
that his writing style does not please his superior. But Werther's likes (for
the Graf and for Fraillein von B.) and dislikes (for the ambassador and
the conventional aristocratic society) are expressed emphatically and repeatedly.
18. Goethe constructs suicide as "Freitod," "a freely taken decision to
withdraw from life." But the public was not ready to accept such a radical conception of "Selbstmord." The reactions, both positive (even imitative) and negative, led Goethe to distance himself from Werther's deed
and, in a time-serving manner, motivate it by mental sickness (in the additions of the second version of the novel and in his memoirs) (see
Blessin 1985, 48, 25-26, 54).
19. Barthes maintains that "Charlotte is quite insipid; she is the paltry character of a powerful, tormented, flamboyant drama staged by the
subject Werther" (1978, 31). Peter Piltz, commenting cleverly on the
scene when Werther overhears Lotte's conversation with a visidng friend,
concludes that Lotte belongs to the world of"insensitive banality'' (1983,
57-58).
20. In view of this explicit rewrite link, I find it incomprehensible
that the only "structuralist analysis" of Rhys's work (based on Greimas's
and Genette's narratology) places the relationship between Jane Eyre and
Wide Sargasso Sea "beyond the scope" of its concerns (Hemmerechts
1987, 441).
2r. The most telling shift in the background/foreground pattern affects the geographical setting. In Bronte's novel the foreground is England, the seat of the empire, and the colonies are a distant background
(of Rochester's prehistory and St. John's posthistory); Rhys's narrative is
set in the colonial West Indies, and England is a distant phantom country, even when at the end Antoinette is (re)moved there. Rhys's treatment
of the opposition mother country (England)/colony (West Indies) has
often been commented on by postcolonialist critics. Here, let me just
mention that several connotative contrasts derive from the shift, for example, the contrast between England's "controlled and measured" landscape and the West Indian "erotic and wild" nature (Friedman 1989, 120;
see also O'Connor 1986, 146-55).
22. For the opposite case, the appearance of new individuals in the

274

Notes to Pages 2I4-2I6
world of the rewrite, see Ep.3.3. Possible-worlds semantics is not unprepared for this incongruency. The Hintikkas, speaking of "failures of
world lines," list among them the case when the "existence [of an indi-.
vidual] may not carry over from a given world to all its alternatives"
(Hintikka and Hintikka 1989, xvi, 189).
23. Gilbert and Gubar convincingly show that in Bronte's novel the
confrontation between Jane and Bertha is complex, showing both antagonism and affinity (1979, 360-62). Thorpe extends the affinity across the
fictional worlds by observing that Rhys's Antoinette "bears striking resemblance to Bronte's portrayal of the younger Jane" (1990, 181).
24. Staley writes of Antoinette: "She will vacillate between the separate worlds of blacks and whites because in her childhood she needed
both .... She grows dependent upon both worlds, but is accepted in neither" (1979, 104).
25. Christophine, the voice of the people, has no doubt about the
origins of Antoinette's madness and tells it to her husband without scruple: "It is in your mind to pretend she is mad. I know it. The doctors say
what you tell them to say" (132).
26. By not naming Antoinette's husband, Rhys introduces a subtle
uncertainty into transworld identification (see Ep.4). No such subtlety is
displayed by critics, who, without hesitation, name the fictional person
Rochester or even Edward (see Staley 1979; Thorpe 1990). (The same
practice is followed in the film version of Wide Sargasso Sea, except that
here the entire production lacks subtlety.) Hemmerechts at least acknowledges that in the final version of Rhys's novel "the name Rochester
does not turn up once" (1987, 441). Only Ramchand respects the author's
manner of naming by consistently calling the male protagonist "Antoinette's husband" or "the young Englishman'' (1990).
27. The most overt device of polyphony, dialogization, is laid bare in
passages where a person's speech provokes silent thought replicas of another's (marked by italics). Such is the concealed, but most revealing, "dialogue" between Christophine and Antoinette's husband, carried out in
a pattern of repeat:
"But all you want is to break her up."
(Not the way you mean, I thought)
"But she hold out eh? She hold out."
(Yes, she held out. A pity)
"So you pretend to believe all the lies that damn bastard tell you."
(That damn bastard tell you) (126).
275

Notes to Pages 2I6-2I9
Now every word she said was echoed, echoed loudly in my head.
"So that you can leave her alone."
(Leav~er alone)
"Not telling her why."
(Why?)
"No more love, eh?
(No more love). (126)
28. Robinsonades, Wertheriades, and similar epidemic transductions
exemplify "multi-stage anaphoric chain[s] of texts and versions" (Margolin 1996, rr6) through which popular fictional persons are carried over
centuries (see also Genette 1982, 351 and passim). There are at least two
modern intermediaries between Defoe's novel and Coetzee's rewrite: Jean
Giraudoux's Suzanne et le Pacifique (1921) and Michel Tournier's Vendredi
ou !es limbes du Pacifique (1967). For an analysis of these French rewrites,
see Genette 1982, 346-50, 418-25.
29. Penner's sober warning-"Foe does not lend itself as readily as
Coetzee's earlier novels to a reading of South African and colonial analogues" (1989, 124)-and author's protesting-"Why should one automatically try to interpret my thinking in political terms? It is not necessary to know my ideas to understand my novels" (qtd. in Gallagher 1991,
16r68)-were not heeded by ideological critics. A woman's narrative
whose main hero is a black slave, written by a white South African writer
in the time of apartheid, was bound to inspire some real gems ofjin-demillenaire critical judgement: "[Susan's] assumption that it is possible to
return Friday to his origins simply by placing him on a boat bound for
Africa represents a denial of geographical, historical and linguistic specificity to the colonial subject. The 'difference' of the colonial subject is reduced to 'sameness' as it is posited with reference to white Western
women" (Dovey 1988, 366). For Carusi, the novel is "an allegory of narrative as a form of commodity" in which a chain of associations is created
between notions of truth, the body, and the story, to be installed and circulated as Law (1989, 13r39). "Th~ relationship between Susan Barton
and Friday can be read as an allegory of a liberal's attempt to come to
terms with the colonial heritage" (Mennecke 1991, 208). "In Friday's silence Coetzee acknowledges where he stands while simultaneously fictionalizing the transformative power that threatens, or promises, to
eclipse the voices of what we might call, for want of a better word, colonial postcolonialism" (Attwell 1993, 108-9). The ideological critic is in-

Notes to Pages 2I9-222
sensitive to the "regime ludique" (Genette 1982, 452-53) of the rewrite
transduction.
30. It should not go unnoticed that this po~tics is alluded to already
b~ Captain Smith, the first recipient of Susan's tale. The captain perceives the commercial potential of the story of "a female castaway'' and
suggests that Susan write it down and "offer it to the booksellers." When
she points out that she lacks the art of writing, he assures her that the
booksellers "will hire a man to set your story to rights and put in a dash of
colour too, here and there" (40; emphasis added). When Susan replies that
she will have no lies told about herself, the captain cynically remarks:
"Their trade is in books, not in truth." Yet at that moment Susan is not
yet ready to accept the "commercial" poetics: "I would rather be the author of my own story than have lies told about me" (40).
31. According to Hutcheon, Susan cannot tell her own story, because
she "has been silenced by a controlling male writer" (1988, 199). Similarly, Gallagher maintains that "condemned by her gender to silence, Susan must turn to the more adequately equipped male in order to see her
story brought into the world" (1991, 177). But it is Susan's acceptance of
the conventional (commercial) poetics that silences her as an original author~ss. ~fher position in the sexual encounter with Foe is an allegory of
dommat10n, as some feminist critics assert, then it is a cliche and a poor
substitute for creative self-assertion.
32. "God's writing," Foe maintains, "stands as an instance of a writing without speech" (143).
33· As is his habit, Coetzee provides the critic and reader with cues
for interpreting obscure passages in his work. It is Foe himself who suggests a connection between Friday, writing, and the sea monster (kraken):
rowing over the kraken's eye, floating "upon the very skin of death," Friday returns safe. Foe draws one conclusion from Friday's mysterious excursion: "We must make Friday's silence speak" and therefore have to
teach him "writing" (140-45). Spivak's interpretation reiterates the semantic link and enriches it by a potential intertextual dimension: the sea
monster is "an image engendered in the representation of the primal
scene of writing but also dredged up from The Tempest, a play repeatedly
read as a representation of the colonizer-colonized dialectic" (1991, 173).
34. Mennecke keeps matters simple: he has no doubt that the entire
fourth part of the novel is Susan's dream (1991, 176, 205). But he admits
that the "dream sequence" resumes motifs occurring in the previous parts
(194-95).

277

Notes to Pages 222-226
35. Thorpe reports that he has seen people ignorant ofJane Eyre and
responding to Rhys's novel "as a self-sufficient work" (1990, 178).
36. This kind of rewrite of Emma Bovary is at least partly implemented in Woody Allen's short story "The Kugelmass Episode" (1975).
But here the encounter of migrants with natives (New Yorkers, of
course!) is facilitated by the genre of the grotesque and accomplished by
means of magic (see Nesselroth 1996, 141).
37. William L. Ashline, who has joined the theorists claiming that
the fictional works violating "the strictures of compossibility" create impossible worlds, is aware of both Genette's "metalepsis" and possibleworlds counterpart theory, but for reasons not given he ignores their relevance for the problem of compossiblity (1995, 220, 227).
38. Lycan cannot quite decide whether to grant identity to fictional
individuals across worlds, but he rightly observes that if we deny this
mobility to nonactuals, we have to do the same for possible counterparts
of actual persons (1994, 123). Nesselroth, in contrast, is definite about the
matter: "When fictional names become part of our cultural knowledge,
they acquire the same value and functions as historical names and any
number of stories can be written about them'' (1996, 141).
39. The rewrite's play with proper names is similar to the practice of
the roman a clef, where historical persons appear under aliases. In this
genre, "transworld identity between real-world persons and fictional
characters has been deliberately occluded, requiring of the reader an act of
decoding or decrypting" (McHale 1987, 206; see also Nesselroth 1996,
138-40). In the most comprehensive monograph on roman a these,
Suleiman does not dwell on this aspect of the genre but observes that
some of its fictional persons "modeled" on historical figures carry different names (1983, 120).
40. The decoding of aliases might be construed as a justification of
those critics who without hesitation call Antoinette's husband "Rochester," speak of Cruso and Crusoe as one and the same castaway, and
see Wiebeau as a contemporary incarnation of Werther. But my castigating of this intuitive practice (in Ep.3.2) is strengthened, rather than invalidated, by the semantics of the alias. It is justifiable on the basis of
structural evidence to link Antoinette's nameless husband with Rochester, but it is crude analysis to ignore that they are fictional persons in
different possible worlds and that their different naming is of-major intensional import.

Glossary

accessibility. Intersection (in the set-theoretical sense) that allows contact
between different possible worlds.
actual world. A realized possible world that is perceived by human senses
and provides the stage for human acting.
alternative world. A possible world that is a transform of the actual world
or another possible world.
authentication. The transformation of a possible entity into a fictional
entity achieved by the performative power of the fictional text.
authentication function. An intensional function that determines the existential structure of the fictional world.
complete world. A world that allows us to decide logically every conceivable statement about it.
compossible entities. Entities that can coexist in one and the same possible world.
constructional text. A text that has the capacity for constructing a possible world.
counterpart. An entity of a possible world that is cross-world identical
with an entity in another possible world.
descriptive text. A text that images the actual world.
extensional fictional-world structuring. Global structuration of the fictional world generated by extensional restrictions.
felicity conditions. Conditions that have to be satisfied for a performative speech act to be successful.
fictional agent. A fictional person capable of intentional acting.
fictional domain. A set of fictional particulars that are characterized by a
certain common feature.
fictional existence. The status of a possible entity authenticated by the
fictional text.
fictional fact. An authenticated possible entity; an entity that exists fictionally.
fictional particular. The elementary constituent of the fictional world.
fictional person (character). A fictional entity that possesses intentionality.
fictional text. A literary text that has the performative force of constructing a fictional world.
fictional world. A possible world constructed by a fictional text or other
performative semiotic medium.
gap. An empty slot in the structure of an incomplete world.
historical counterpart. An entity in the history of the actual world that is
cross-world identical with a fictional-world entity.
impossible world. A world that contains or implies logical contradictions.
incomplete world. A world that does not allow us to decide logically
every conceivable statement about it.
intensional function. A regularity of the text's texture projected into the
fictional world.
intensional fictional-world structuring. Global structuration of the fictional world generated by the impact of an intensional function.
metafiction. A narrative that constructs both the fictional story and one
or more of the factors of the construction-the author's fiction
making, the reader's or critic's reception, the book production, and
so on.
mimesis. A doctrine according to which fictional worlds and their entities are imitations or representations of the actual world.
mimetic function. A function that assigns actual-world prototypes or
categories to fictional entities.
modal operator. Logical representation of the individual values of modal
systems.
modal system. A system of modal restrictions-alethic, deontic, epistemic, axiological-that is the main factor of the extensional fictional-world structuring.
mythological world. A fictional world that consists of a natural and a supernatural domain.
natural world. A possible world in which the physical laws of the actual
world are valid.
performative speech act. A speech act that brings about a change in the
world.
possible world. A world that is thinkable.
saturation. The ratio between fictional facts and gaps in the structure of
the fictional world.
saturation function. An intensional function that determines the degree
of the fictional world's saturation.
self-disclosing narrative. Narrative that reveals (lays bare) the conventions of authentication.
self-voiding. Invalidation of a performative speech act caused by its misuse.
semiotic accessibility. Contact between the actual world and the fictional
world made possible by the act of authorial construction and readers' reconstruction.
small world. A possible world constructed from a limited set of entities.
supernatural world. A world in which the physical laws of the actual
world are not valid.
text. The highest connected unit produced by verbal activity.
text extension. The aspect of text meaning constituted by the relationship of the verbal signs to the extralinguistic world entities and expressed in a regulated paraphrase.
text intension. The aspect of text meaning expressed by texture.
texture. The exact wording of the text.
transworld identity. A relationship of identity between entities that are
located in different possible worlds.
virtual fictional particular. A possible entity that is presented in the fictional text but not authenticated.
world. The totality of material and mental entities that can be designated
by linguistic or other semiotic means.
